Authorship and ownership of copyright 
Introduction 
As copyright is a property right, this raises important questions about ownership and the mechanisms for exploiting copyright. Authorship and ownership are, in relation to copyright, two distinct concepts, each of which attract their own peculiar rights; the author having moral right and the owner of the copyright  possessing economic rights. Sometimes the author of a work will also be the ownership of the copyright in the work, but this is not always so and many works have separate authors and owners as far as copyright is concerned. Ownership flows from authorship; the person who makes the work is normally the first owner of the copyright in the work, providing that he has not created the work in the course of employment in which case his employer will be the first owner of the copyright. The owner of the copyright in a work may decide to exploit the work by the use of one or more contractual methods. He may grant a licence to allow a third party to carry out certain acts in relation to the works, such as making copies, in which case, he retain the ownership of the copyright. Alternatively, the owner may assign the copyright the copyright to another, that is transfer the ownership of the copyright to a new owner, relinquishing the economic rights under copyright law. One point to bear in mind is that a third party can carry out certain acts in relation to the whole or a part of a work protected by copyright without the permission of the owner of the copyright in the work and without infringing the copyright in the work, for example by performing one of the acts falling within the fair dealing provisions or because the act is not restricted by the copyright. There is little that the owner of the copyright can do about these limitations and exceptions to copyright protection apart from denying access to the work itself, for example, by refusing to publish the work. 

Consider a single work in which copyright subsists. There may be several relationships and activities connected with the work and the copyright to the work. Figure 4.1 shows the relationships that might exist in relation to a work. 

(a) The author is the person who has created the work in question. 
(b) The copyright in the work is owned by a person who might be the author of the author's employer or a person who has become the owner of the copyright because the title to the copyright has been transferred to him. 
(c) With respect to the work, there are certain acts which are restricted by the copyright. These 'restricted acts' (an example is making a copy of a work) can only be carried out by the owner of the copyright or by someone having the owner's permission, such as a licensee. Otherwise, subject to certain exceptions, the copyright in the work will be infringed.  
(d) The copyright owner can grant licences in respect of the work which will allow the licensee to do all or some of the restricted acts, in accordance with the terms of the licence. Sometimes, a licensee will be permitted to grant sublicences to others. 
(e) The copyright owner and any licensees and sublicensees, subject to the terms of the licence agreement, will be able to carry out all or some of the restricted acts. 
(f) A third party, for example a member of the general public, can carry out a restricted act only if it is permitted by copyright law (the permitted acts, for example the fair dealing provisions for criticism or review). The requirement for the permitted act in question must be complied with, for example by giving a sufficient acknowledgement. 
(g) Any person can carry out acts in relation to the work that are not acts restricted by copyright, such as lending to a friend a book or a music cassette or reading a book. There may, however, be contractual restrictions affecting such acts. 
(h) All persons including the owner of the copyright, licensees, sublicensees and embers of the public generally must respect the author's moral rights. The author may be able to enforce his moral rights irrespective of the identity of the present owner of the copyright 9provided that author has asserted his right to be identified as author and has not otherwise waived it). 

Authorship 
The author of a work is the person who creates it. In terms of some types of works this will be self-evident; for example, the author of a work of literature is the person who writes it, the author of a piece of music is its composer, the author of a photograph is the photographers and so on. 

Notice that, normally, the director of a film will have no claim of authorship because it is the producer (or the film company employing the producer) who makes the arrangements necessary  for the making of the film, not the director. A director of a film can, however, still have moral rights, as will be seen in chapter 5. 

Because copyright protects only the expression of an idea, there may be occasions when the originator of the information that forms the basis of the work in question will not be considered to be the author of the work. For example, in Springfield v Thame the plaintiff, a journalist, supplied newspapers with information in the form of an article. 

In principle, there is nothing to prevent as a corporate body being the author of a work as section 154 (1) (c) recognizes that a work may qualify for copyright protection if the author is a body incorporated under the law of the United Kingdom. This may apply in the case of derivative works, for example, a sound recording or film, where the work in question is the result of arrangements made by senior officers of a music or film company, in which case the company can be deemed to be the author. 

(P.59) 
The identification of the author is important for determining the first ownership of copyright and also for measuring the duration of the copyright. 

Frequently, a work will be the result of the efforts of more than one person. Several employees may work together to produce a written report, a team of computer programmers and systems analysts together may produce a computer program, two or more persons may collaborate in the writing of a work of literature, a piece of music or the painting of a landscape in oils. Collaboration between two or more persons will result in a work of joint authorship only if their respective contributions to the finished work are not distinct from each other, by section 10 (1). That is, the work cannot be broken down so that each author's contribution can be separately identified. Thus, an abstract oil painting created by two painters applying paint to create an effect previously agreed by them would be a work of joint authorship as would be a sound recording made of an impromptu jazz session involving several musicians. A book comprising separate chapters written by different authors is not a work of joint authorship neither is a song where one person has written the music and another has written the words, as in Gillbert and Sullivan operetta. In the latter cases, each person involved will be the author of their own distinct work and in the case of a song, the person writing the music will be the author of the musical work whilst the person writing the lyrics will be the author of those lyrics, as a literary work. Two copyrights will exist in the song, each having different authors (and, possibly, different owners) and the duration of the copyright in the music and the lyrics will differ according to the dates when the composer and lyricist die. 

(P.65) 
For derivative works of copyright there will usually be several rights associated with the work and the exploitation of works in which numerous rights exist can be fairly complex although collecting societies such as the Performing Right Society do lead to some simplification. 

(P.66) 
Dealing with copyright 
As has been previously mentioned, copyright is a property right and as such the owner of that right can deal with it. He can transfer the right to another or he can grant licences to others, permitting them to do some or all of the acts restricted by the copyright in relation to the work. However, it must be remembered that the author of a work has certain moral rights and the owner of the copyright and his assignees or licensees, indeed the public in general, must take notice of and respect these moral rights. Therefore, the ultimate owner of a copyright is not entirely free to do as he wishes with the work that is the subject matter of the copyright. However, in most cases, respecting the author's moral rights will not be a hindrance to the economic exploitation of copyright. 

The are two ways of dealing with copyright: by assignment and by licensing. Licences may be exclusive or non-exclusive. In the case of an assignment of copyright or an exclusive lincence, the transaction, to be effective, must be in writing and signed by or on behalf of the present copyright owner. Although this can be seen as a safeguard for the copyright owner who may be negotiating with powerful publishing organizations from an unequal bargaining position, it can lead to difficulties in the case of commissioned works because it clearly means that the commissioners cannot have any legal rights of ownership under copyright law unless a written signed agreement exists. 

(P.69) 
 A licence is, in essence, a permission granted by the owner of a right or interest to another person allowing him to do something in respect of that right or interest. 

In relation to copyright, a licence is an agreement between the owner of the copyright (the licensor) and another person (the licensee) whereby that person is permitted to do certain acts in connection with the work involved that would otherwise infringe the copyright in the work. 

A licence may be exclusive. By section 92 (1) of the Act, an exclusive licence is a licence in writing signed by or on behalf of the copyright owner authorizing the licensee, to the exclusion of all other persons including the owner, to exercise a right that would otherwise be exercisable exclusively by the copyright owner. The licensee is exclusively granted rights to do certain things in relation to the work and the owner (licensor) will not grant those equivalent rights to anyone else or even exercise them himself. For example, the owner of the copyright in a work of literature may grant an exclusive licence to a book publisher for the purpose of publication of the work. The owner of the copyright will not grant the right of publication to anyone else whilst the exclusive licence is in existence and, indeed, if he attempts to do so, he will be in breach of the exclusive licence. 
However, although the licence is exclusive, it need not apply to all the acts restricted by copyright and may encompass only one or some of the acts restricted by copyright, such as publishing a book, and the owner will be free to deal with other rights, such as the broadcasting of extracts of the work recited by a famous actor. In the case of a non-exclusive licence, the licensee may make several agreements in respect of the same acts restricted by copyright. For example, the owner of the copyright in a play may allow several theatrical companies to make public performances of the play. 

By section 90 (4) of the Act, a licence granted by a copyright owner is binding on every successor in title to his interest in the copyright, except a purchaser in good faith for valuable consideration without actual or constructive notice, and persons deriving title from such a person. So, 'equity's darling', the bona fide purchaser for value without notice is given protection that overrides the interests of licensees which is one reason why a commercial organization, such as a publisher, wishing to exploit a work of copyright might prefer to take an assignment of the copyright rather than to operate on the basis of an exclusive licence. 

Other differences between assignments and licences are that only the owner has a right to sue (although an exclusive licensee may sue after joining the owner or by leave of the court) ans a right to alter, subject to the author's moral rights. In the absence of express provisions to the contrary, as assignment will generally be assignable but a licence will not be assignable unless expressly provided for. 


