9
European and international aspects o f copyright
INTRODUCTION
The freedom to exploit intellectual property rights internationally is vital to the future growth of investment in the creative fields. But, even if the prospect of international trade in the work or article concerned is not contemplated, international protection cannot be ignored. For example, a copyright owner might intend only to sell a book or recording of music on the domestic market but pirate copies could be produced in a foreign country with weak intellectual property laws and imported into the domestic market, seriously damaging the copyright owner's commercial interests.
Of central importance is the state of law in the European Community. The United Kingdom became a member of the European Economic Community at the beginning of 1973 and with the coming of the single market, the interaction between United Kingdom intellectual property law and the Treaty of Rome is of utmost importance.' By Article 3 of the Treaty the aims of the Community include the elimination of quantitative restrictions on the import and export of goods and the abolition of obstacles to freedom of movement for persons, services and capital, ensuring that competition in the common market is not distorted. Exploitation of intellectual property may be in conflict with some of these aims and, although one might expect the main problems to result from patents or trade marks, there are several issues involving copyright. One thing to be borne in mind is that these aims are only applicable as regards trade between Member States. Another aim of the Community is the approximation of the laws of the Member States to the extent required for the proper functioning of the common market, that is the harmonization of laws. This is not a wholesale levelling of national differences or, at least, has not yet proven to be although domestic United Kingdom intellectual property law has been changed as a result and will be further changed in the near future.
COPYRIGHT LAW AND THE TREATY OF ROME
By virtue of the European Communities Act 1972, Community law takes precedence over inconsistent domestic law. Section 2(1) of that Act states:
All such rights, powers, liabilities, obligations and restrictions from time to time created or arising by or under the [Community] Treaties, and all such remedies and procedures from time to time provided for by or under the Treaties, as in accordance with the Treaties are without further enactment to be given legal effect or used in the United Kingdom shall be recognised and available in law, and be enforced, allowed and followed accordingly ...
Any doubts about the supremacy of European Community law over inconsistent domestic law were laid to rest well before the United Kingdom's entry on 1 January 1973? The exercise of intellectual property- rights might conflict with several provisions in the Treaty of Rome 1957 (the European Economic Treaty). Those provisions are:
• Articles 30-36 which promote the free movement of goods, • Article 85 which prohibits restrictive trade practices,
• Article 86 which prevents the abuse of a dominant trading position.
Also, Article 7 of the Treaty provides that any discrimination on the grounds of nationality shall be prohibited. Therefore, one Member State may no: exclude authors and performing artists from another Member State from the rights enjoyed by nationals. German law on copyright and related rights provided that non-German nationals could not rely on the provisions which prohibited the distribution of unauthorized recordings of performances given outside Germany. In Collins v Imtrat Handelsgesellschaft mbH3, Phil Collins argued that this provision offended against Article 7 in an action relating to the distribution in Germany of a compact disc containing a recording made without his consent of one of his concerts given in the United States. On a reference to the Court of Justice for a preliminary ruling under Article 177, the Court confirmed that copyright and related rights fell within the scope of Article 7 and the principle of non-discrimination applied to those rights. This was so even though there was not yet full harmonization of copyright and related rights throughout the Community: they fell within the Treaty's provisions because of their effect on intra-Community trade in goods and services.
The exercise of intellectual property rights may entail the control and dividing up of markets by the number and type of licence agreements entered into by the owner and the terms contained in them. For example, a United Kingdom company may own the copyright in a sound recording and decide to grant a licence to a Dutch company to make and sell copies in The Netherlands. A similar licence may be granted to a French company and both licence agreements may purport to prohibit either the Dutch or French company selling the recordings outside their respective countries. This would appear to interfere with the principle of the free movement of goods, especially if the recordings sell at different prices in different countries.
European Community law does recognize intellectual property rights. Article 222 of the Treaty of Rome states that nothing in the Treaty shall prejudice the rules in Member States governing the system of property ownership and intellectual property is undoubtedly a form of property. However, this refers to domestic law in Member States and, where the exercise of those rights interferes with the provisions of the Treaty, the rights will be compromised. Article 222 has to do with the existence of a right whereas Articles 30-36 are concerned with the exercise of that right. In principle, because copyright affords a weaker form of protection and does not lock away ideas as such, the possibility for conflict seems to be less than with patents or trade marks. However, there are a number of cases dealing with copyright licensing, disparity in protection between Member States, problems with collecting societies and issues similar to those occurring in the British Leyland spare parts case.4 First, the reconciliation of copyright with the free movement of goods will be considered followed by the impact of Articles 85 and 86.
The freedom of movement of goods and copyright
Article 30 of the Treaty states that, `Quantitative restrictions on imports and all measures having equivalent effect [are] ... prohibited between Member States' and Article 34 contains a similar provision as regards exports. Although Article 36 permits such restrictions and measures if they are for the protection of industrial and commercial property, the prohibitions have been held to apply to copyright and neighbouring rights.5 The purpose of Articles 30 and 36 is to reconcile the requirements of the free movement of goods with the necessary respect for the legitimate exercise of exclusive rights in `literary and artistic property'.6 This has entailed the development of the doctrine of exhaustion of rights which is applied where the owner of the rights associated with copies of works that have been lawfully sold or distributed within a Member State attempts to use those rights to prevent the subsequent importation of the copies into another Member State. The doctrine is used to suppress the exercise of the rights in such circumstances. The European Court of justice is prepared to recognize that certain activities fall within the normal exploitation of the work even though, at first sight, they may seem to be in conflict with Articles 30-36. For example, in Bassett v Societe des Auteurs, Compositeurs et Editeurs de Musique (SACEM)7 a royalty of 8.25 per cent was charged by SACEM for playing records in a discotheque in Frejus in France. The 8.25 per cent was calculated on the basis of a performing right and a mechanical reproduction right. In all other Member States, except Belgium, the mechanical reproduction rights were exhausted on an assignment to a manufacturer of phonograms and only a performance royalty had to be paid. The court held that Articles 30-36 did not prohibit the levying of the supplementary mechanical reproduction fee in addition to the usual performance fee even though the mechanical reproduction fee was not payable in the Member State where the recordings were first lawfully put on the market.$ The extra royalty was seen as being part of the normal exploitation of the copyright and was not, therefore, an `arbitrary discrimination or disguised restriction' on the trade between Member States.
Parallel Imports
Parallel importing occurs when someone, often a third party, attempts to import copyright articles from one country, where they have been lawfully distributed,9 to another country, usually against the copyright owner's wishes. However, any attempt to prevent or interfere with this will, at once, bring into question the applicability of Articles 30-36. In Musik Vertrieb Membran GmbH v GEMA,10 Musik Vertrieb imported sound recordings into Germany from the United Kingdom and other Member States. The royalty fee paid, under the then statutory licence fee arrangements subsisting in the United Kingdom was 6.25 per cent.11 There was no statutory licence system in place in Germany at the time but the normal royalty payable to the German collecting society, GEMA, was 8 per cent. GEMA therefore sued for the difference, 1.75 per cent. The European Court ruled that GEMA could not claim the difference on the basis of Articles 30-36 as the recordings had been put on the market with the consent of the copyright owner. However, the `consent' in this case was not true consent as such but as a result of statutory licence. Nevertheless, the European Court appeared to accept that, on the facts, the owner had consented and it stated (at 166):
Articles 30 and 36 . . . [preclude] the application of national legislation ... where those sound recordings are distributed on the national market after having been put into circulation in that other Member State by or with the consent of the owners of those copyrights ...
This is to treat the notion of consent very widely and, in essence the de jure consent is looked for rather than de facto consent, although the right owner under a statutory licence is unlikely to refuse the royalties accrued in this way. However, it does appear that the Court may have changed its approach since the Musik Vertrieb case, as discussed below.
More recently, it has been held that Articles 30-36 did not prevent the working of national legislation to allow a copyright owner to rely on exclusive right, in order to prevent the sale in one Member State of copies of a work made in another Member State lawfully although without the consent of the copyright owner. So it was held in EMI Electrola GmbH v Patricia Im- and Export Verwaltungsgesellscbaft mbH12 in which copies of Cliff Richard recordings were made in Denmark, where exclusive rights under Danish copyright law had expired, and imported into Germany. However, such a restriction could not be justified on the ground of disparity of protection under national copyright laws where it constituted a means of arbitrary discrimination or a disguised restriction on trade between Member States. The question of whether an attempted restriction on parallel importing is controlled by Articles 30-36 appears to depend largely upon consent, that is whether the articles have been made available in the other country by the consent of the right owner, and it appears that the European Court is tending to move away from its decision in Musik Vertrieb and require actual rather than illusory consent.13
The above cases show the working of the doctrine of exhaustion. The sale or distribution of articles embodying a copyright work (or a patent or design right) in one Member State with the consent of the owner is said to exhaust the owner's rights to further control, exclusively, subsequent dealings in those articles.
A useful statement of important points regarding the application of Articles 30-36 to copyright was given in Warner Bros. Inc. v Cbristiansen,14 which concerned video rental rights. At the time, there was no rental right in the United Kingdom once video films had been made and sold with the owner's consent, but there was such a right in Denmark. Warner Bros. made video films in the United Kingdom and granted a licence to a Danish company to make them there. A parallel importer bought videos in the United Kingdom and intended to hire them out in Denmark. The court ruled that an injunction against the parallel importer was justified and that the rental rights under Danish law were applicable and were not prohibited by Articles 30-36. The court further stated the principles that apply in terms of film copyright and Articles 30-36, including the following:
(a) The inclusion of an exclusive rental right among rights granted to copyright holders under national law constitutes a quantitative restriction under Article 30.
(b) The rights of the owner of a copyright work that are not touched by the rules of the Treaty are the exclusive rights of performance and reproduction.
(c) Where rental to the public constitutes a significant market and source of revenue for copyright owners and the only way for the latter to secure a share of that revenue is to grant an exclusive right to authorize such hiring out, national copyright laws conferring such an exclusive rental right are justified by Article 36(1).
(d) Where the copyright owner chooses to market copies of films in the form of videos in a Member State whose copyright law does not grant an exclusive rental right, that does not exhaust his rental right in another Member State
whose law grants such a right. It is, therefore, permissible under Article 36 for him to enforce his rental right in the latter State and this also applies to copies imported from the former State.
These principles should also apply to sound recordings and computer programs. Surprisingly, there have not been any reported cases on the rental of computer programs. Of course, licence agreements for the acquisition of computer programs usually contain terms prohibiting the subsequent transfer or rental of the program. Such terms probably offend against Articles 30-36 of the Treaty if trade between Member States is adversely affected as a result.
Anti-competitive practices, Articles 85 and 86
Articles 85 and 86 are the main provisions to counter anti-competitive practices that may result fro m a cartel or from an abuse of a dominant position.15 For example, all the manufacturers of vehicle tyres could get together and agree to raise their prices to a common level rather than try to compete in terms of the price each asks. The manufacturer of a motor vehicle might refuse to allow others to make spare parts for his vehicles. Article 85(1) makes agreements between undertakings and decisions by associations of undertakings and concerted practices that may affect trade between Member States illegal if they have, as their object or effect, the prevention, restriction or distortion of competition within the European Community. Particular agreements, decisions and concerted practices are stated to be those which:
(a) directly or indirectly fix purchase or selling prices or any other trading conditions;
(b) limit or control production, markets, technical development, or investment; (c) share markets or sources of supply;
(d) apply dissimilar conditions to equivalent transactions with other trading parties, thereby placing them at a competitive disadvantage;
(e) make the conclusion of contracts subject to acceptance by the other parties of supplementary obligations which, by their nature or according to commercial usage, have no connection with the subject of such contracts. Obviously, a licence agreement in relation to the exploitation of a work in which copyright subsists could be caught by Article 85(1). For example, a licence might state that the licensee must restrict his operation to a part of the European Community or that the licensee may only make a specified number of copies or that the licensee may not sell or distribute copies of similar works made by organizations that are rivals of the licensor. The European Court has made it clear that it will be prepared to act against exclusive copyright licences if they offend,16 and, although intellectual property rights per se do not fall
within the meaning of the term `agreement' within Article 85(1), the exercise of an intellectual property right might well do so.17 Terms within licence agreements, such as export bans, may be susceptible to control. To some extent it is a matter of whether the provision is part of the specific subject matter of the right and in Re Ernest Benn Ltd. 18 an export ban was objected to on the basis of Article 85(1). Exemption from the provisions of Article 85(1) are possible, either individually or through block exemption under Article 85(3) and a number of Commission Regulations have been passed giving block exemptions, for example in respect of patent licensing agreements and know-how licensing agreements.19
Reciprocal agreements between collecting societies protecting national inter-ests do not fall foul of Article 85. In Ministere Public v Tournier2O it was held that such collecting societies were pursuing legitimate aims where they sought to safeguard the rights and interests of their members, and contracts with users for that purpose could not be regarded as falling within the meaning of Article 85(1). However, this assumed that the practice was not excessive and did not go beyond what was necessary to achieve those legitimate aims.
Article 86 prohibits the abuse of a dominant position within the Common Market. It states:
Any abuse by one or more undertakings of a dominant position within the common market or in a substantial part of it shall be prohibited as incompatible with the common market in so far as it may affect trade between Member States ...
Again, it must be noted that the abuse must affect trade between Member States and if it does not, there is no remedy under European Community law no matter how unfair the practice concerned is.21 Four examples of abuse are given in Article 86:
(a) the imposition of unfair trading conditions or prices,
(b) the limitation of production, markets or technical developments, (c) discrimination against some trading parties, and
(d) the imposition of unconnected supplementary obligations in contracts. Examples would include the limitation of the supply of music recordings or video films in respect of some Member States, probably coupled with high prices. A supplementary obligation that would offend is where a publisher will only supply to retail outlets who agree not to buy from a rival publisher resident in another country.
What constitutes an abuse of a dominant position is not defined as such in Article 86 but in Hoffmann-La Rocbe AG v E C Commission22 it was described as:
an objective concept relating to the behaviour of an undertaking in a dominant position which is such as to influence the structure of the market where, as a result of the presence of the undertaking in question, the degree of competition is weakened and which, through recourse to methods different from those which condition normal competition ... has the effect of hindering the maintenance of the degree of competition still existing in the market or the growth of that competition.
Abuse is, therefore, directed at the use of methods different from normal commercial practices. Refusing to supply further goods until those already supplied have been paid for is outside Article 86.23
Merely occupying a dominant position does not automatically bring Article 86 into play. For example, a collecting society occupies a dominant position in its particular country of operation and in Bassett v SACEM24 the French collecting society SACEM was occupying a dominant position but the exercise of its power was not an abuse as such. The European Court of justice will not normally interfere unless some plain abuse is present. In Volvo AB v Erik Veng (UK) Ltd.,25 Volvo refused to grant licences to spare part manufacturers and the court held that the proprietor of a protected design has a right to prevent third parties from manufacturing, selling or importing spare parts incorporating the design and that this was the very subject-matter of the right. Consequently, the court would not impose a compulsory licence because to do so would be to take away the essence of the right even though royalties would be payable. Volvo's decision to refuse to grant a licence was not, therefore, an abuse of its dominant position.26
This lack of interference with the exercise of rights is not absolute and in Magill TV Guide/ITP, BBC and RTE,27 the European Commission effectively granted a compulsory licence in respect of listings for forthcoming television programmes even though the television companies concerned were refusing to make them available at all, except to their own publications. A distinction can be made between the Magill case and the Volvo case in that, although it refused to grant licences, Volvo did supply spare parts whereas in the Magill case, the listings were not made available in advance at all. The outcome of the Magill case has been enshrined in statutory form in the Broadcasting Act 1990, as section 176 imposes a duty to provide advance information about programmes broadcast by the BBC, the ITC and the Welsh Authority.28
A defendant sued for an infringement of copyright might, in desperation, advance a `Euro-defence', for example under Article 86 of the Treaty. If nothing else, such a ploy might lengthen the proceedings especially if the case is referred to the European Court for a preliminary ruling under Article 177.29 In Ransburg-Gema AG v Electrostatic Plant Systems30 it was alleged that the defendant had infringed the copyright subsisting in certain drawings. The defendant entered a `Euro-defence' claiming that the plaintiff was guilty of a breach of Article 86. In striking out the Euro-defences, Aldous J held that there must be a connection between the alleged actions of the plaintiff and the alleged breach under Article 86. The existence of an exclusive right and its exercise were not per se a breach of the Treaty of Rome. Further, to show this, the Euro-defence must be sufficiently detailed. In the earlier case of Imperial Chemical Industries Ltd. v Berk Pharmaceuticals Ltd.,31 Megarry VC struck out Euro-defences because the defendant had failed to show a sufficient nexus between the alleged breach of Article 86 and the right claimed by the defendant, in that case, to imitate the plaintiff's get-up.
The occasions when the European Court will interfere with the normal exploitation of copyright are quite rare and the court seems to have achieved a fine balance between commercial exploitation and misuse of the right. The fact that copyright law is not harmonized throughout the Community has the effect of raising the status of, and hence the ability to rely on, national laws. Whether, in the course of time, if and when copyright laws are assimilated within the Common Market or a Community-wide copyright is achieved, the European Court will be more willing to intervene with the exploitation of copyright remains to be seen.
HARMONIZATION
Unlike patent law and trade mark law, copyright varies considerably within the Member States of the Community. Harmonization in patent law has been largely achieved through the non-Community European Patent Convention and plans are well under way to grant Community-wide patents before too long. Trade mark harmonization was required by 1 January 199332 and a Euromark may become a reality in due course. However, copyright laws remain distinct and diverse amongst the Member States and this can be traced back to the development of copyright law with the strongly economic-biased English system standing in contrast to the French emphasis on the author's rights, for example with its droite de suite, the artist's resale right which requires that a percentage of the resale price of an artistic work is paid to the author.33
Although all the Member States are signatories to the Berne Convention there are still significant differences in copyright law and it will be some time before congruence can be achieved. This state of affairs does not mean that all thoughts of bringing together copyright laws have to be suppressed because there have been some moves towards this goal and a number of Council Directives have been issued and others are proposed. The first Directive in the copyright field was aimed at harmonizing the copyright protection of computer programs.34 The need for this was, to some extent, a reflection of the diversity of copyright law between Member States and the undesirability of different treatments given the international spread of computer programs and the size and influence of the computer industry.
Table 9.1 EC measures affecting copyright
Description	Compliance date	Reference	Comment
Directives	before 1 January	OJ [1991]	Given effect by the
Legal protection of	1993	L122/42	Copyright (Computer computer programs	Programs) Regulations 1992 (see Chapter 8). Rental and lending rights	not later than 1	OJ [1992]	See Chapter 6.
and certain rights relating July 1994	L346/61 to copyright
Copyright and	before 1 January	OJ [1993]	See Chapter 8.
neighbouring rights	1995	L248/15 relating to satellite
broadcasting and cable retransmission Proposals for Directives
Term of protection of	not later than 1	OJ [1993]	Without prejudice to
copyright and certain	July 1997	C 27/7	acts of exploitation
related rights	performed before 1 July 1994, see Chapter 3. Legal protection of	before 1 January	OJ [1993]	See Chapter 8.
databases	1995	C 194/144
Further Directives have been adopted on rental and lending rights and satellite broadcasting and cable retransmission. There are proposals under consideration to deal with the term of copyright and the legal protection of databases. The Commission are also looking at home copying of sound and audiovisual recordings and moral rights. Table 9.1 on page 203 summarizes the legislative measures taken or proposed by the European Community that affect copyright and neighbouring rights.
Whilst it is unlikely that there will be an attempt at a wholesale bringing together of copyright law throughout the European Community in the near future, it is certainly possible that more moves will be made in respect of other copyright issues raised by the march of technology. The European Commission has published a Green Paper on copyright which might lay the foundations for future action in the area of copyright.35
INTERNATIONAL CONVENTIONS
The two international copyright conventions lay down minimum standards for copyright protection and provide for reciprocity of protection between those countries that have ratified the conventions. At the present time, each convention has a significant number of members (Berne has 102) and many countries, including the United Kingdom, having ratified both conventions. The United States of America, one of the original members of de Universal Copyright Convention has recently also joined the Berne Copyright Convention as has the Peoples' Republic of China. The Berne Copyright, Convention is administered by the World Intellectual Property Organization and the Universal Copyright Convention by UNESCO, the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization. The Berne Copyright Convention dates from 1886 and has European origins. It has been and continues to be very successful but, as a means of encouraging other states to join an international copyright `club', without requiring the Berne Copyright Convention to be watered down, the Universal Copyright Convention came into existence in 1952. One of the aims of this convention was to narrow the gap between the European concept of droit d'auteur and the common law countries' notion of copyright law based firmly on economic rights.36 (This ignores the fact that the United Kingdom seems to have coped quite happily with the Berne Copyright Convention since its ratification in 1887.)
An examination of some of the provisions of the Berne Convention will give a feel for its influence on United Kingdom copyright law.37 Article 1 of the Berne Convention states that:
The countries to which this Convention applies constitute a Union for the protection of the rights of authors in their literary and artistic works.
However, `literary and artistic works' are comprehensively defined by Article 2 as including `every production in the literary, scientific and artistic domain, whatever may be the mode or form of its expression' and then goes on to give a comprehensive and wide list of examples. Protection is afforded also to translations, adaptations, arrangements of music and other alterations of a literary or artistic work: Article 2(3). Generally, the term of protection is the life of the author and 50 years after his death but countries in the Union may grant longer
terms.38 The text of the convention contains all the other main provisions such as the rights of the author in relation to the work, `permitted' acts and for the author's moral rights.39 The convention can be thought of as a basic statement of principle with the detailed implementation being left to the member countries. Both of the conventions allow ample scope for differences in implementation and many provisions are optional. For example, in the Berne Copyright Convention droit de suite, the artists resale right, is available `only if legislation in the country to which the author belongs so permits'.40 United Kingdom copyright law does not provide for this right and, therefore, United Kingdom artists do not have a right to a payment on the subsequent resale of their works.
The Universal Copyright Convention lacks the detail of the Berne Copyright Convention and takes a more `broad brush' approach. Article 1 states:
Each Contracting State undertakes to provide for the adequate and effective protection of the rights of authors and other copyright proprietors in literary, scientific and artistic works, including writings, musical, dramatic and cinematographic works, and paintings, engravings and sculpture.
The minimum term of protection shall not be less than the life of the author and 25 years after his death. One important difference between the conventions is that the Berne Copyright Convention requires no formalities - `The enjoyment and the exercise of these rights shall not be subject to any formality'41 - whereas the Universal Copyright Convention permits Contracting States to require compliance with formalities including deposit, registration, and the payment of fees. This has important implications for other countries, for to obtain reciprocal protection in a country having formalities, works must bear the copyright symbol (c) accompanied by the name of the copyright proprietor and the year of first publication `placed in such a manner and location so as to give reasonable notice of claim to copyright'.42 This explains the importance of using such a symbol in order to obtain the greatest possible international protection with respect to copyright works even though, in the United Kingdom, there is no requirement for such a notice 43
The international conventions have played and will continue to play an important role in the development of copyright law and in laying down minimum standards. In addition to the Berne and the Universal Copyright Conventions, there are other conventions dealing with copyright matters such as satellite broadcasts and phonograms.44 The reciprocal protection initiated by the conventions has been instrumental in the protection of works of copyright on a much wider and more homogeneous scale than would otherwise have been the case.
Jursdiction
If an infringement occurs in a foreign country, legal action must be taken in that particular country and the United Kingdom courts will not entertain disputes relating to foreign patents, copyright or trade mark laws.45 Rights under intellectual property are territorial and only acts done within the United Kingdom infringe United Kingdom copyright 46 In such a case, advantage should be made of the reciprocity arrangements, if applicable, to take action in the country where the infringement occurred. However, the transnational character of broadcasting can extend the geographical boundaries of copyright as in
BBC Enterprises Ltd. v Hi-Tech Xtravision Ltd.47 where persons enabled or assisted to receive encrypted transmissions included persons outside the United Kingdom within the `footprint' of the broadcasts for the purposes of section 298(2)(a) of the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988.48	
