(P.3) 
What is Intellectual Property Law?
Intellectual Property Law is that area of law which concerns legal rights associated with creative effort or commercial reputation and goodwill. The subject matter of intellectual property is ver wide and includes literary and artistic works, films, computer programs, invention, designs and marks used by traders for their goods and services. The law deters others from copying or taking unfair advantage of the work or reputation of another and provides remedies should this happen. There are several different forms of rights or areas of law giving rise to rights that together make ups intellectual property. 
* Copyright 
* Rights in Performances 
* The Law of Confidence 
* Patents 
* Registered Designs 
* Design Right 
* Trade Marks 
* Passing Off 
* Trade Libel. 

(P.4) 
A practical distinction that can be used to subdivide the various rights is whether there is a requirement for registration, that is whether the right is dependent upon the completion of formalities, or whether it is automatically springs into life at specific time. Another distinguishing feature is the nature of the right, whether it applies to something which is primarily creative or has to do with goodwill in a wide commercial sense. Creative things can be further subdivided into those that are creative in an artistic or aesthetic sense, such as an oil painting, music  or literature, or those that are inventive in an industrial context such as a new type of machine or engine or a new way of making a particular product. 

Formalities 
Some intellectual property rights, in respect of particular ideas, works or things, are secured by the successful completion of a formal application and registration procedure. 

For those rights that require registration, the applicant will succeed in obtaining such registration only if certain rigorous standards are achieved. The rationale for this is that rights subject to formalities are generally monopolistic in nature. Another distinction is between those rights that are provided for and governed by statute and those that derive from the common law (although the latter are given statutory recognition). there is no correlation between the need for formalities and whether the area of intellectual property law is rooted in statute. 

(P.5)
Industrial Property 
Traditionally, a number of intellectual property rights were known collectively as intellectual property. Such rights include patents, trade marks and designs. This term was used in the Paris Convention for the Protection of Industrial Property, 1883. Included in this term by implication are the law of confidence and passing off. When other rights such as copyright are added to industrial property the phrase used to describes the entirety of rights is intellectual property and this has become the phrase normally used to describe these individual, and sometimes disparate, rights collectively. 

(P.6) 
Copyright 
Copyright is a property right which subsists (exists) in various 'works', for example, literary works, artistic works, musical works, sound recordings, films and broadcasting. The author of a work is the person who creates it and he (or his employer) is normally the first owner of the copyright which will last until 50 years after the author's death or 50 years after it was created depending on the type of work. Copyright gives the owner the right to do certain things in relation to the work which include making a copy, broadcasting or giving a public performance. Anyone else who does any of these things, known as acts restricted by copyright, without the permission of the owner, infringes copyright and may be sue by the owner for that infringement. Ownership of a copyright is alienable and it can be transferred to another or a licence may be granted by the owner to another, permitting him to do one of more specified acts with the work in question. 

Copyright does not protect ideas only the expression of an idea 9that is, its tangible form), and it is free to others to create similar, or even identical works as long as they do so independently and by their own efforts. In other words, does not create a monopoly I a particular work. In addition, certain things may be done in relation to a work of copyright without the permission of the copyright owner such as making a copy of a work, for example, for the purposes of research, private study, criticism or review. Such acts are known as 'permitted acts' and limit the scope of copyright protectin. Copyright gives rise to two forms of rights: proprietary or economic rights in the work, for example the right to control copying, and, secondly, moral rights which leave the author, who may no longer be the owner of the copyright, with some control over how the work is exploited in the future. The author has a right to be identified as such and has a right to object to derogatory treatment of the work. The moral rights are independent of the economic rights and hence the importance of the distinction between the author of a work and the owner of the copyright subsisting in it. There are some form of infringement which can be grouped together as being of a commercial nature, such as importing or dealing with infringing copies, that carry criminal penalties. 

International protection of copyright works is effected mainly through two international conventions, the Berne Copyright convention and the Universal Copyright Convention, both of which lay down minimum standards of protection to be attained and for reciprocity of protection between those countries that are signatories to the conventions. The conventions have been responsible for the measure of harmony that now exists on the world stage, albeit far from complete. The effect is that a foreign national can sue in the United Kingdom for copyright infringement occurring there as if he was a British subject. The United Kingdom is a member of both conventions. 

Right in Performances 
Live performances give rise to two different rights, the performer's right and a recording right. The former is not dissimilar to the author's moral right in copyright, whilst the latter in akin to the copyright owner's economic right. Alive performance will frequently involve copyright materials, for example, where a recently written piece of music is performed. Sound recordings, films and broadcasts of the performance will all be protected by copyright law. However these rights in performances are required to give the performer himself some rights that we will not otherwise have, unless he is performing a song which he has written himself, to prevent someone (colloquially known as a 'bootlegger') making a recording of the performance without permission for the purpose of making and selling copies. Rights in performances are also important if the work being performed in out of copyright such as a piece of classical music Another factor is that, if the music is still protected by copyright, the copyright owner may be unwilling to take action. Rights in performances are not restricted to music and are available in respect of a dramatic performance, the reading or recital of a literary work and, a recent addition, the performance of a variety act such as by a juggler. 

Rights in performances last for 50 years and the performer's consent is required by any person wishing to make a recording of the performance or transmit it. The person entitled to the recording right is the person who has an exclusive recording contract with the performer. The recording contract with the performer. The recording right is infringed by making copies without consent of by dealing with infringing copies. The performing right may be not assigned (although it may pass on the death of the performer), indicating its similarity with moral rights, although the recording right is assignable. Like copyright, there are similar exceptions to infringement and criminal offences associated with certain types of infringement. 

The Law of breach of confidence 
The law of breach of confidence developed as a way of protection confidential information by prevention its use by persons to whom the information has been divulged in confidence or the further disclosure of the information by such persons. A wide variety of types of information are protected, ranging from industrial or trade secrets to details of a personal nature to secrets about the Government or defence of the realm. In the context of intellectual property it is with trade and industrial secrets that we are primarily concerned. The rationale of the law of confidence is that it stops a person making wrongful use of information beyond the purposes for which it was disclosed to him. The law of confidence protects ideas and is a useful ally to other intellectual property rights, often being the only form of protection when the subject matter is still in its embryonic state. 

Patent law 
A patent right, because it gives its owner a monopoly, is the form of intellectual property par excellence. A patent may be granted in respect of a new invention capable of industrial application and gives a monopoly right that can last for up to 20 years. This very strong form of protection is reserved for inventions that satisfied rigorous standards (for example, novelty and inventiveness) and an application for a patent has to be drawn up precisely and accurately stating that the scope of the invention and the claims made in respect of it for which protection is sought. A patent may be for a product such as a new type of longer lasting light bulb or a new type of ignition system for a petrol engine or it may be for a new industrial process, for example, a new way of making synthetic rubber tyres or a novel technique for making plate glass. 

(P. 8) 
Patents bcan be assigned and licences may be granted in respect of them. The owner of a patent is the person who is registered as the proprietor. A large number of inventions are made by employees and usually, in such cases, the employer will be the proprietor although the inventor will still be named as such. If the invention turns out to be outstanding benefit to the employer, the employee may apply for a compensation award. By their nature, patents usually protect ideas but there are several controls on the monopoly status they confer upon proprietor. For example, compulsory licences may be available after the first three years from the grant of a patent or it may be indicated on the register of patents that a licence is available as of right. A compulsory licence would e appropriate if the patent was not being worked or if the proprietor was limiting supply of a patented product in order to maintain unrealistically high prices. 

It is probably in respect of patents that the greatest strides have been made towards international harmonization, particularly within Europe. The European Patent Convention permits the application for a bundle of patents covering a specified number of Member States including the United Kingdom. The administration of the convention, patent applications, patent grant and resolution of patent disputes are within the remit of the European Patent Office, situated in Munich, which has its own Boards of Appeal. The growing significance of this route to international patent protection cannot be underestimated and, before long, it should be possible to obtain a Communication-wide patent. Protection in other countries may be obtained through the Patent Cooperation Treaty, a system which facilitates the application procedure where several countries are concerned although it does not the level of concordance between members that the European Patent Convention can boast. 

Design law - registered designs and the design right 

A new object or article may be designed which is not sufficiently novel or inventive to satisfy the exacting requirements for the grant of patent. Designs that are applied may be protected by design law. There are two systems of design law in place in the United Kingdom (some European Countries use a watered down version of patent law for designs known as petty patents or utility patents). Of the two United Kingdom systems, one requires registration, has some features in common with patent law in a very broad sense, and applies to designs that have and are intended to have eye-appeal. Example are household ornaments, toys, display packaging and some electrical appliances. These designed can be described as being aesthetic. The other system of design protection is called the design right and is provided for along copyright lines. This right applies to designs that can be said to be functional in nature such as a new design for an engine cover, fan cowling or plastic printer ribbon container. It can, however, also apply to many registrable designs and there is a large overlap between the two forms of design rights. Both forms of design right relate to the design aspects of the shape or configuration of an article and, for registered designs only, also to pattern and ornament. 

The registered design lasts for up to 25 years, initially granted for five years and then subject to renewal every 5 years, whereas the design right can last for 15 years but this will be reduced if the design is applied commercially during its first five years. Confusingly, the creator of a registered design is known as its author whereas the creator of a design in which the design right subsists is known as the designer. The owner (proprietor for a registered design) will normally be the creator unless the design was created by an employee or under a commission. Both right are transmittable. There are potential overlap between the two rights themselves and between the two rights and copyright. This is a complex issue which is dealt with in detail in Part 5 of this book. 

(P.9)
Trade marks 
Trade marks may not have the glamour of inventions or creative works but they are, nevertheless, of substantial importance in an industrial and commercial sense. Trade marks are closely associated with business image, goodwill and reputation. Goods and services are often requested by reference to a trade mark and the public rely on many marks as indicating quality, value for money or origin of goods and services. 

Trade marks are registered in respect of certain classes of goods or services. Service marks have been registrable since 1986 as a result of the Trade Marks Amendment Act 1984. However, the separate description of 'service mark' will soon disappear and all marks will be known as trade marks. Registrations for trade marks may be renewed indefinitely. Registration for trade marks began in 1876 and some of the first marks registered (including the very first mark, the Bass Red Triangle label mark) are still in use today. In addition to marks applied to or used in connection with goods or services, there are also certification marks indicating the origin or quality of the goods, for example the 'wood mark'. All registered marks must be used they can be revoked if they are not used for five or more years. A basic principle is that a trade mark should identify a connection in the course of trade between a trader and his goods (or a provider of services and those services). 

Significant changes to trade mark law are underway and, at the time of writing, a new Trade Marks Bill is before Parliament. This will replace the Trade Mark Act 1938 which is widely recognized as an obscure and difficult piece of legislation, and a thorough overhaul of trade mark law is long overdue. In addition to bringing trade mark law up to date, the new Act will allow the United Kingdom to comply with the European Community Directive on the approximation of the laws of Member States relating to trade marks. The implications of the new forthcoming Act are fully discussed in Chapter 20. 

Passing off 
The tort of passing off is, in effect, a common law version of trade mark law. Indeed, trade mark law developed from passing off which in turn developed from the tort of deceit. Being common law, passing off can be more flexible than trade mark law and can apply to marks that would not be sufficiently distinctive for registration as a trade mark. As with trade mark law, passing off is concerned with the protection of business goodwill and reputation and this has the secondary effect of protecting the buying public from trade deception. One area of interest is character merchandising, usually a massive commercial activity whereby famous and often fictional characters are used to promote the sale of goods, for example by applying pictures of the characters to the goods. Mickey Mouse watches and Ninja Turtle T-shirts are examples. The law is belatedly showing signs of recognizing rights in this field of commerce, extending the boundaries of intellectual property. 

Nature of Intellectual Property (p.10) 

Intellectual property is property in legal sense: it is something that can be owned and dealt with. Statutory forms of intellectual property are declared to property rights but even common law forms have been recognized as producing a form of property right. 
Most forms of intellectual property are 'chose in action', right that are enforced only by legal action as opposed to possessory rights.  

Jurisprudential character (P.11)

Intellectual property gives rise to rights and duties. It establishes property rights, which give the owner the right to do certain things in relation to the subject matter. For example, if the right is a copyright and the subject matter is a piece of music, the owner of the copyright has the exclusive right to make copy of the sheet music, to make an arrangement of the music and to control the performance of the music. The right can arise automatically, on the creation of the thing to which the right pertains, an example being copyright which springs to life automatically upon the recording of a work. In other cases,  the right depends on the completion of an application and registration procedure, patents and trademarks being examples of such rights. 
In one area of intellectual property, the right comes into existence only after goodwill has been established. This is the tort of passing off where one trader is attempting to take unfair advantage of another trader's goodwill. 

Rationale and justification for intellectual property law (p.17)

Intellectual property is, therefore, the most basic form of property because a man uses nothing to produce it other than his mind. 
Combination of intellectual property rights (P.18)
The lifespan of an invention or a work of copyright can comprise several different stages, and, during these stags, different intellectual property rights may afford protection to the invention or work. For example, an idea for an invention will be protected by the law of confidence until such time as a patent application is published. Once a patent has been granted in respect of the invention, patent law takes over. 

Other rights might me appropriate such as the law of trade marks or passing off if a mark or name is applied to the product. Intellectual property rights work together to provide legal protection throughout the life of the product until such time as all the rights have expired for one reason or another. 
