Moral rights 
Introduction 
In tardy recognition of parts of the Berne Copyright Convention and in acknowledgement of the importance with which moral rights are regarded in much of the rest of Europe, the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988 gives overt recognition and legal effect to such rights given to the creator of a work in which copyright subsists. United Kingdom copyright law has a tradition of emphasizing the economic rights associated with copyright, whilst the French model stresses the author's rights to control and be identified with his work regardless of the ownership of the economic rights. The Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988 bundles a collection of rights together under the appellation 'moral right' even though some might not be thought to fall within this description, an example being the false attribution right and the right to privacy in certain photographs and films. There are four rights within the 'moral right' designation, being: 
(a) the right to be identified as the author of a work or director of a film, the 'paternity right';
(b) the right of an author of a work or director of a film to object to derogatory treatment of that work or film, the 'integrity right';
(c) a general right that every person has not to have a work falsely attributed to him; 
(d) the commissioner's right of privacy in respect of a photograph or film made for private and domestic purposes 

Notice that the Act refers to the director of a film. Usually, the director will not be the author of copyright purposes as the author of a film is, be section 9 (2) (b), the person by whom the arrangements necessary for the making of the film are undertaken and this will be typically be the producer of the film. It is his job to make the practical arrangements, the director's function is to provide artistic guidance and direction. Although the director of a film is not normally considered to be the author, he is in an analogous position to the author of, say, a literary or dramatic work; that is, he plays a creative role, hence the provision for moral rights for film directors. 

In typically half - hearted fashion, these rights do not apply globally to all types of copyright work and, additionally, there are many exceptions to the application of the rights. 

To supporters of moral rights, the work in which they have been dealt with by the Act seems to be very much a compromise. Often there will be a conflict between a moral right and an economic right, an example being in the case of employee - authors. Bearing in mind that as regards a literary, dramatic, musical and artistic work made by an employee in the course of his employment, the employer will be the first owner of the copyright by section 11 (2), the Act effectively overrides the author's right to be identified as the author in relation to anything done by or with the authority of the copyright owner. 

Moral rights were hailed as a novelty in United Kingdom copyright law. However, this is not really so; other areas of law could give remedies to the author. A licence agreement or assignment of copyright could have contained terms requiring that the author's name be placed prominently on copies of the work and that the work must not be modified. A treatment of an author's work which is derogatory of the false attribution of a work might give rise to an action in defamation. Fore example an eminent and distinguished author, Edword, might write a serious and noble play about love conquering adversity and assign he copyright to a television company. If the television company then rewrites the play and changes it into a smutty farce and broadcasts it and Edward's name appears in the credits as being associated with the writing of the play, Edward will have an action in defamation on the basis that hie reputation would be significantly harmed by this. The same might apply if an inferior and tasteless musical work has been falsely attributed to a celebrated and highly regarded composer with a high international reputation. 

An author's moral rights can be protected indirectly because the act complained of might involve a normal infringement of copyright. For example, if another person, with of permission of the copyright makes a parody of the work, the author might feel aggrieved and the copyright owner might decide to sue for infringement because the parody contains a substantial part of the original work. However, only the copyright owner could bring a legal action and an author who did not own the copyright in his work had to stand by helplessly unless the treatment of the work was defamatory. It should be noted that the right to object to a derogatory treatment of the work is likely to be actionable in wider circumstances that would be the case in defamation because it extends to treatment which distorts or mutilates the work without necessarily affecting the author's reputation. In fact a distortion or mutilation of a work is, from the language of section 80 (2) (b), prejudicial to honour or reputation of the author or director, per se. 

(P.78) 
Right to be identified as the author or director of a work (the paternity right) 

The right to be identified as the author of a literary, dramatic, musical or artistic work or as the director of a film is a new departure for United Kingdom copyright law. But it is not as wide ranging as it should be and there are a number of exceptions to it. Additionally, the author or director must assert the right for it to be effective. The right does not apply to other types of works, such as sound recordings and broadcasts where it would be inappropriate in any case; not does the right apply to works in which copyright does not subsist - the work must be a 'copyright' work. Furthermore, the right does not apply to all forms of the works included - for example, the right does not apply to computer programs even though these are literary works. 

(P.79) 
Section 77(1) of the Copyright, Design and Patents Act 1988 states that the right to be identified as author or director applies to literary, dramatic, musical, artistic works and to films. However, the right is not infringed unless it has been asserted in accordance with section 78 so as to bind the person who carries out an activity which gives rise to the right to be identified. By section 78 (2), the right may be asserted generally or in relation to specified acts either: 
(a) on assignment, by including a statement in the instrument effecting the assignment - for example, a term in the assignment stating that the author or director asserts his moral right to be identified as such (an assignment must, of course, be in writing and signed by or on behalf of the assignor by section 90) 
(b) by written instrument signed by the author or director - for example, by including a suitable term in a licence agreement. However, it may simply be a written notification of the right and not part of some contractual document. 

There is no requirement that the right must be asserted before or at the time of any assignment or licence and it would appear that the right may be asserted at any time even subsequent to the transfer of the economic rights in the work. 

Under the transitional arrangements contained in paragraphs 22 to 24 of Schedule 1 to the Act, the right to identified as author applies to literary, dramatic, musical and artistic works made before the commencement of 1988 Act if the author was still alive at that date. Therefore, the right to be identified as author can be asserted in respect of a pre-existing work, by a written instrument signed by the author. There are certain safeguards - for example, nothing done before the commencement date is actionable as an infringement of moral rights, and assignees and licensees may continue to perform acts covered by an assignment or licence granted before the comment date. 

(P.80) 
Scope of the right to be identified as the author or director 
In relation to literary works (other than words intended to be sung or spoken with music) and dramatic works, the author has the right to be identified whenever:
(a) the work is published commercially, performed in public, broadcast or included in a cable programme service; or 
(b) copies of a film or sound recording are issued to the public. 

The right also applies to these acts in respect of adaptations. That is, the author has the right to be identified as the author of the work from which the adaptation was made, for example, if an author, Florence Smith, writes a story in English and another person later translates the story into German and publishes copies of the German translation commercially, then, providing that Florence has asserted her paternity, copies of the German version must contain a clear and reasonably prominent notice to the effect that the story has been translated from the original English version written by Florence Smith. 

Also, by section 77 (5), the author of a work of architecture in the form of a building (that is, the architect) has the right to be identified on the building as construed or, where more than one building id constructed to the design, on the first to be constructed. However, it is unlikely that names of architects will be founded on the first example of a mass-produced design, such as on a speculative builder's housing estate because, as will be seen below, all moral rights can be waived. It is likely that a property developer commissioning an architect will press for a waiver of this moral right unless, of course, the architect is very famous, and the fixing at or near the entrance of the finished building of a suitable plaque upon which the architect's name is inscribed would be a good selling point. Alternatively, the fame and reputation of the architect may be such that he is in a strong bargaining position and can insist on exercising his right to be identified. There is no provision for the right in respect of adaptations of artistic works, the reason being that it is not an infringement of an artistic work to make an adaptation of it. 

The Act provides that the right to be identified applies in relation to the whole or any substantial part of the work. For example, if a short extract from a literary work is printed and published commercially, the right still applies providing that the extract represents a substantial part of the whole work. It would be ridiculous if the copying ans publication of a short extract would infringe the economic right but not the moral right and, therefore, it is to be expected that 'substantial in the context of moral rights will have the same meaning developed by the courts for economic rights, remembering that, by section 16 (3), acts restricted by the copyright apply in relation to the work as a whole or any substantial part of it. The transitional provisions in Schedule 1 confirm this approach in that paragraph 23(3) links infringement of moral rights to infringement of the economic rights under copyright, although this is in the context of things permitted under assignments or licences. It would seem sensible that infringement of moral rights should be on all fours with infringement of economic rights concerning the requirement for substantiality. 

(P.83) 
The exceptions to the right to be identified as the author or director are contained in section 79 of the Act. These exceptions have the effect of significantly weakening the paternity right in respect of certain types of works or as regards authors with a particular status. Coupled with the fact the right must be asserted and that the right, in common with the other moral rights, in capable of being waived by the person entitled to it, this reduces the practical importance of the right to what it is, perhaps, a regrettable extent. If an author has been commissioned to create work, he might be under pressure to waive his moral rights by his paymaster who may be of the view that moral rights are an undesirable hindrance to the commercial exploitation of the work, or just plain inconvenient. 

The exceptions to the right to be identified as the author or director of a relevant work are classified by reference to: 
(a) The type of work (section 79(2)). Computer programs, designs of typefaces and computer-generated works are excluded from the province of the paternity right. This confirms the uncomfortable categorization of computer programs as literary works. A typeface includes an ornamental motif used for printing and would normally fall within the graphic work category of artistic work. 

(P.85)

Right to object to derogatory treatment of the work 
In addition to having a paternity right (subject to exceptions and conditions), the author of literary, dramatic, musical or artistic work and the director of a film has an 'integrity right', a right to object to derogatory treatment of the author's or director's work. It has always been possible for a copyright owner to limit the extent and nature of alterations that can be made to a work by a licensee. A copyright owner who is also the author can thus provide for the continuing integrity of the work by contractual means. Before the right to object to derogatory treatment existed, in the absence of express or implied terms in a licence agreement, the licensee had the right to make alterations but this was not necessarily an absolute right and, in Frisby v British Broadcasting Corp., it was said that the curt would, in appropriate circumstances, limit that right to make alterations. 

The integrity right is described by section 80 (1) as the right belonging to the author or director not to have work subjected to derogatory treatment. For the right to apply, the work must be a 'copyright work', that is a work in which copyright subsists; furthermore, the right is subject to exceptions and only applies as regards certain acts carried out in relation to the work. As with all other moral rights, the right can be waived with the consent of the person entitled to the right, who might be the author or director or a person taking the right after the death of the author or director. The integrity right also applies to works which existed prior to the commencement date of the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988, subject to certain conditions. 

'Derogatory treatment' is described in section 80(2) as being a treatment which amounts to distortion or mutilation of the work or is otherwise prejudicial to the honour or reputation of the author or director. If the treatment does injure the honour or reputation of the author or director, it is possible the it may give rise to a claim in defamation in addition to an action for infringement of the moral right. 

(P.86) 
an important aspect of the integrity right is the question of what amounts to derogatory treatment of a work. Certainly, reducing the aesthetic content or damaging the literary style of the work by altering it, in other words, reducing the merit of quality of the work, would probably fulfill the requirements. An example is where a parody is made of music intended to be taken seriously or in the case of a performance of a send - up of a worthy drama. An indication of the meaning can be gleaned from the French case of Rowe v Walt Disney Productions, heard in the Cour d'Appel in Paris. In this case it was argued that moral rights under French law had been infringed, including the author's right to integrity. 

(P.90) 
False Attribution of a Work 
It is difficult to know whether the 'false attribution right' is a moral right in the true sense as it does not concern any work created by the person to whom the right accrues. Nevertheless, the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988 places the right firmly amongst the other moral rights and also includes another right which is somewhat out of place in terms of traditional moral rights, that is a right to privacy in relation to certain photographs and films. 

(P.93) 
Joint Works 
The fact that many works are the result of the effort of joint authors (or joint director), defined as being collaborative works where the respective contributions of the authors or directors are not distinct from the others, requires that the moral rights provisions in the Act have to contain some rules to be applied in such cases. Not only does the Act have to address infringement of the paternity and integrity rights associated with joint works but it is also has to consider the possibility that a work might be falsely attributed to joint authors or that a photograph or film may be subject to a joint commission. Section 88 deals with joint works and, briefly, makes the following provisions: 
(a) for a joint author (or director) to take advantage of the paternity right he must assert the right himself. An assertion by one joint author will not benefit the other;
(b) the right to object to derogatory treatment applies to each joint author or director individually. The consent of one to the treatment does not prejudice the right of the author;
(c) the false attribution right is infringed by any false statement as to the authorship of a work of joint authorship and by falsely attributing joint authorship to a work of sole authorship. Similar provisions apply to the directorship of film;
(d) the right to privacy in certain films and photographs applies to each commissioners individually. The consent of one to the relevant act does not prejudice the right of the other. 

(P.94) 
Duration 
The duration of moral rights is provided for in a fairly straightforward way  by section 86. In all cases except the false attribution right, they endure as long as copyright subsists in the work in question. As the duration of copyright is, in most cases where moral rights are likely to be in issue, the life of the author plus fifty years this can be seen as fairly generous. 




