What is copyright? (P.25) 

Copyright is a property right that subsists in certain specified types of works as provided for by the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988. Example of the works in which copyright subsists are original literary works, films and sound recording. The owner of the copyright subsisting in a work has the exclusive right to do certain acts in relation to the work such as making a copy, broadcasting or selling copies to the public. These are examples of the acts restricted by copyright. The owner of the copyright can control the exploitation of the work, for example, by making or selling copies to the public or granting permission to another to do this in return for a payment. 

A broad classification can be made between the various types of copyright work. Some such as literary, dramatic, musical, and artistic works are required to be original. Other works, such as films, sound recordings, broadcasts, cable programmes and typographical arrangements can be described as derivative or entrepreneurial works and there is no requirement for originality. 

It is theoretically possible, if unlikely, foe two reasons independently to produce identical works, and each will be considered to be the author of his work for copyright purposes. 

(P.26) 
Another feature of copyright law which limits its potency is that it does not protect ideas, it merely protects the expression of an idea. 

Copyright also restricted in its lifespan; it is of limited duration although it must be said that copyright law is rather generous in this respect. For example, copyright in a literary work endures until the end of the period of fifty years from the end of the calendar year in which the author dies. Approximately, therefore, copyright lasts for the life of the author plus fifty years. 

Ownership of the copyright in a work will often remain with the author of the work., the author being the person who created it or made the arrangements necessary for its creation, depending on the nature of the work. However, if a literary, dramatic, musical or artistic work is created by an employee working during the course of employment, his employer will own the copyright. Additionally, copyright, like most other forms of property right, can be dealt with; it may be assigned, it may pass under a will or intestacy or operation of law and licences may be granted in respect of it. 

Full acknowledgement of moral rights is a relatively recent concept in United Kingdom copyright law though well established in other European countries. 

These moral rights, such as the right to be recognized as the author of a work and the right to object to a derogatory treatment of the work, remain with the author irrespective of subsequent ownership and dealings with the ownership of the copyright. They recognize the creator's contribution, a way of giving legal effect to the fact that the act of producing a work is an act of creation and that the creator has a link or bond with the work which should be preserved regardless of hard economic considerations. 

But the difficulties in defamation and the attendant expense and uncertainty are good reasons for the author - work nexus to be specifically recognized and enforceable in copyright law. However, just how straightforward the enforcement of moral rights is remained to be seen. 

A recent example of copyright being adapted to prevent the unfair use of works created by or associated with modern technology is the way that many countries have extended copyright to expressly include computer programs in the fold of copyright works. 

(P. 29)
in the Berlin revision of 1908 (the Berlin Act), inter alia, the term of copyright protection was increased to the life of the author plus 50 years and copyright was extended to cover choreographic works, works of architecture and sound recordings. The revision also introduced the compulsory licence and removed formalities. 

The 1956 Act classified works as being either original works (Part I works - literary, dramatic, musical and artistic works) or part II works sometimes known as derivative works or entrepreneurial works (namely, sound recordings, cinematograph films, broadcasts and the typographical arrangement of published edition). These works could be described as derivative as they were usually based on a Part I work. For example, a sound recording may be made of the life performance of a musical work. The link was not essential and part II work could be subject to copyright protection without an equivalent Part I work, for example, a sound recording of a bird singing could qualify for copyright protection. 

Finally, in response to major technological developments, the current Act, the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988 was passed. This Act takes due account of 'moral rights', inalienable rights which belong to the author irrespective of the ownership of copyright. These are equivalent to the droit moral of the Rome Act of 1928 of the Berne Convention; that is a right to claim authorship of a work and the right to object to any distortion, mutilation or other modification of a work, which could be prejudicial to the honour and reputation of the author. This also has the effect of pulling English copyright law closer to that subsisting in most other European countries. 

Copyright and its relationship to other intellectual property rights (P.30) 

An act giving rise to infringement of copyright may be associated with or accompany a breach of confidence. 

Generally, things that fall within the ambit of copyright law are excluded from the grant of patent, but preliminary materials, such as plans, sketches, specifications and the like will be protected, in principle, by copyright. That is, copyright will subsist in each of these items irrespective of any patent granted for the invention with which the items are concerned. 

(P.31) 
When the music is written down, it will be protected by copyright both before and after publication. After publication, of course, confidentiality will be lost. Live performances of the music will be protected by Part II of the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988 which deals with rights in performances (replacing the Performers' Protection Act 1963) and any recordings made will be protected as sound recordings. 

Copyright as a means of exploiting a work

If an unpublished work is copied and sold by someone without the permission of the copyright owner, remedies, such as damages, additional damages, accounts of profits and injunctions are available depending on the circumstances. They are, however, available only to the owner of the copyright or an exclusive licensee. An equitable owner of the copyright cannot obtain damages or a perpetual injunction without joining the owner of the legal title to the copyright, although an equitable owner may be able to obtain a interlocutory injunction on his own. If the poet in the example wants his anthology of poems published, he might decide to approach prospective publishers, and if one agrees to publish, the poet might grant an exclusive licence to the publisher allowing him to print and sell copies of the poems in book form. 

(P.32) 
An added attraction, in the case of an exclusive licence - a licence granting the exclusive rights of, for example publishing the work in the United Kingdom - is that the publisher has the right to sue for infringement and if he is successful, the poet will be entitled to a share of the damages awarded equivalent to his lost royalties attributable to the infringement. Depending on the terms of the exclusive licence, the poet may be free to make agreements in respect of other modes of expression of the poems, such as a sound recording of the poems being recited by a famous actor. 

A major attraction of the exclusive licence, or for that matter an assignment, to a publisher is that copyright actions tend to be fairly expensive and daunting for an individual to pursue but a reputable publishing company will not hesitate in enforcing its rights under copyright law and, indirectly, the rights of author. 

(P.33) Subsistence of copyright 

Fundamentally, copyright law exists to prevent others taking unfair advantage of a person's creative efforts. 

Some of the primary effects of the 1988 Act in terms of copyright law are that it:
(b) provides more effectively for 'moral rights' for authors, in accordance with the Berne Convention; 

Copyright can subsist only in specified descriptions of works 

(P.34) 
Originality 
One can be excused for believing that this means that work must be new or innovative in some sense but, in copyright law, the word 'original' does not have its ordinary dictionary meaning and the courts have interpreted originality very loosely. The work does not have to be unique or even particularly meritorious. Rather, originality is usually taken to require that the work in question originated from the author, its creator, and that it was not copied from another work. 

(P.35) 
Meaning of work
For copyright to subsist in a literary, dramatic, musical or artistic work, it must qualify as a 'work' and one way of determining this is to consider the amount of skill or labour which has gone into its creation. 

However, this case would probably be decided differently today, a work in which copyright subsists may be created in a relatively short time, for example, an artist's freehand sketch. 

The United States Supreme Court held not in Feist Publications Inc. v Rural Telephone Service Co. Inc. in denying copyright protection to purely factual compilations, laying to rest the 'sweat of the brow' doctrine. 
 
(P.36)
Idea/expression
The United States has a well-defined legal principle that copyright protects expression but not ideas; indeed the Copyright Act of 1976 specifically states that ideas, procedures, processes, systems, methods of operation, concepts principles and discoveries are excluded from copyright protection. 

(P.37)
De minimis principle
It is clear that it would be ridiculous to afford copyright protection to works that are trivial in the extreme or so small as to be entirely insignificant. 

The court will often, though not always, use the principle de minimis non curat lex, that is, that the work is insufficiently significant to be afforded copyright protection. 

A fortiori a name cannot be subject to copyright. For example, the name of the fictional television detective 'Kojak' was not protected by copyright. 

Generally, copyright will not subsist in advertising slogans and titles because they are usually fairly brief and the song title 'The Man who Broke the Bank at Monte Carlo' was held to be insufficiently substantial for copyright purposes. 

(P.38)
We have seen that copyright does not protect ephemeral things such as an idea for a novel or a play. As such, ideas may have some protection under the law of confidence, depending upon the circumstances. Copyright law is, because of the nature of the drafting of the current Act and previous Acts, directed to the expression of ideas rather than the ideas themselves. The methods used by copyright law is to require that the work has some tangible form. In case of some works, such as sound recordings and films, their very existence implies tangibility. The same applies to artistic works. 

Therefore, for literary, dramatic and musical works the Copyright, Design and Patent Act 1988 declares that copyright does not subsist in such works unless and until they are recorded, in writing or otherwise. 

The requirement for some tangible existence is also important in that it dates the creation of the work; that is, the work is deemed to have been made when it is recorded. 

Literary work 
Section 3(1) of the Copyright, Design and Patent Act 1988 defines a literary work as any work, other than a dramatic or musical work, that is written, spoken or sung, and includes a table or compilation, a computer program, and preparatory design material for a computer program. It should already be clear that a literary work does not have to be a work of literature and this is implied by the inclusion of tables, compilations, computer programs and preparatory design material for computer programs in the category of literary work. 

(P.39)
This must be expanded nowadays to cover materials recorded on computer storage media and compact discs. For example, a report produced using a word processor is a literary work the moment it is stored on a computer disk because it is then recorded in writing or otherwise. 

Examples of works afforded literary copyright are books of telegraphic codes, examination papers, football coupon, consignment notes, headings in a trade directory and business letters. Tables and compilations expressly fall within the meaning of literary work, examples of tables being railway timetables, company balance sheets, actuarial tables and mileage charts. 

Although it has been accepted in the past that a compilation can comprise both literary and artistic materials, a change in terminology in the 1988 Act may mean that there is no copyright protection in a compilation of artistic works only because a literary work must be written, spoken or sung and it can be argued that artistic works are not written. Of course, the artistic works may be protected in their own right. 

The Copyright, Design and Patent Act 1988 affords copyright protection to computer programs and preparatory design material for computer programs as literary works. 

For a work to be an 'original literary work', it must be accord with that phrase taken as a whole. 

(P.40) 
However, it was held that the term 'original literary work' was a composite expression denoting a literary work intending to offer information, instruction or pleasure in the form of literary enjoyment. For a word or expression to be within the meaning of 'original literary work', it was not enough that the work could be described as 'original', 'literary' and a 'work'. 

Dramatic work 
A dramatic work includes a work of dance or mime. Under the Copyright, Design and Patents Act 1988, this sterile overlap is removed and a literary work is defined to exclude a dramatic work. 

(P. 41)
Musical work 
A musical work is one consisting of music, exclusive of any words or action intended to be sung, spoken or performed with the music. A song will, therefore, have two copyrights, one in the music and one in the words of the song, the latter being a literary work. 

Artistic works
Section 4(1) of the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988 defines artistic work as meaning: 
(a) a graphic work, photograph, sculpture or collage, irrespective of artistic quality,
(b) a work of architecture being a building or a model for a building, or 
(c) a work of artistic craftsmanship. 

(P.42) 
Copyright may subsist in a photograph of a painting providing skill and judgement has been expended, for example, by selecting part of the painting only and/or choosing lighting conditions, aperture settings etc. 

Like literary, dramatic and musical works, artistic works must be 'original'. 

With the exception of works of artistic craftsmanship, artistic copyright is very generous in what it can protect and in the scope of the protection. Some fairly simple things have been afforded artistic copyright such as a bare design of a hand, a simple label and a working sketch of machinery. 

(P.44) 
Sound Recordings, Films, Broadcasts or Cable Programmes 
These are the derivative works. They are usually based on original literary , dramatic and artistic works, for example a recording of pop tunes, where the record is protected as a sound recording and each tune will have musical copyright and literary copyright in any lyrics. Sometimes, however, a derivative work is not based on one of the 'original' works. For example, a recording of a flying  Scotsman building up steam will be a sound recording but there is no other underlying work. 

(P.45)
O course, if the owner of the copyright in a film successfully sues for infringement of copyright, he may distribute part of the award in damages to the various copyright owners in accordance with the contractual arrangements. In the case of account of profits in respect of concurrent right under an exclusive licence, the court will apportion the profit between the licensor and licensee. 

Compared to the 'original' works of copyright, these derivative works give rise to far fewer problems relating to the question of copyright subsistence. There is no requirement that these works be original because many would fail; for example, in a broadcast of a play, the play may be an original dramatic work in the copyright sense but the broadcast cannot be original in the popular sense. 

(P.46) 
Film
As the definition only refers to the image, a sound track is not included but will have a separate copyright as a sound recording. Merely copying an old film or an old sound recording does not bring about a new copyright, for, by section 5 (2), copyright does not subsist in a sound recording or film which is, or to the extent that it is, a copy taken from a previous sound recording or film. 

(P.47)
For copyright to subsist in a work, by section 1 (3) of the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988, the qualification requirements must be satisfied. This can be achieved in two ways, either by reference to the author of the work or by reference to the country of first publication or, in case of a broadcast or cable programme, the country of the first transmission. 

As a result, if a work is first published in or transmitted from a convention country or if the author of the work is a citizen of or is domiciled in a convention country the owner will be able to take action for infringement in the United Kingdom. Similarly, works first published or transmitted in the United Kingdom or having an author who is British or is domiciled in the United Kingdom will be protected in all the other convention countries. 

(P.48) 
Qualification by reference to the author 

As will be seen in the following chapter, authorship and ownership of copyright are two distinct concepts and it is quite common for copyright to be owned by non-living legal persons such as corporations. However, it is self-evident that the author of a literary, dramatic, musical or artistic work will be a living (for lately deceased) person. In case of computer-generated literary, dramatic, musical and artistic works and sound recordings, films, broadcasts and cable programmes the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988 still defines the author in terms of a 'person', that is the person who makes the arrangements necessary for the creation of the work, makes the work or the broadcast or provides the service, but in relation to these works it would seem that all forms of legal persons, including artificial persons such as corporations can be the author of the work. 

(P.50) 
As a rule, the identity of the author of a work will be know and commonly the author will have produced his work on his own, not in collaboration with another author. The copyright in a literary, dramatic, musical, or artistic work of known authorship, having a single author, expires at the end of the period of 50 years from the end of the calendar year during which the author dies.

(P.51) 
if the work is the result of the collaboration of two or more authors and the contribution of each is not distinct from the other or others it is a work of joint authorship and, by section 12 (4), the 50-year period runs from the end of the calendar year during which the last surviving author dies. 
In determining whether the work has been made available to the public, no account is taken of any unauthorized act so that the period of 50 years does not start to run if the work has been performed in public without the permission of the copyright owner.  


