11 Introduction
This area of law is concerned with secrets of all kinds. They may be of a personal, commercial or industrial nature or concern the state and its administration. State secrets received a great deal of publicity a few years ago as a result of the publication of Spycatcher written by Peter Wright, a former assistant director of MIS, but it is in relation to trade secrets and business information that the law of confidence is of everyday importance. The vast majority of persons owe an obligation of confidence to others; all employees have a duty of confidence to their employers, consultants owe a duty to their clients, doctors have a duty of confidence in respect of their patients and solicitors are bound by a duty of confidence to their clients. The law of confidence also covers business transactions and negotiations and an obligation of confidence will be implied in a great many situations where there is no express agreement as to confidentiality.
Breach of confidence is a tort which lies in the domain of equity and is almost entirely based on case law. However, there is statutory recognition of the law of breach of confidence. For example, section 171(1) of the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988 states that:
Nothing in this Part [the part of the Act dealing with copyright law] affects ... the operation of any rule of equity relating to breaches of trust or confidence
The notoriously widely drafted section 2 of the Official Secrets Act 1911, now replaced and narrowed by section 1 of the Official Secrets Act 1989, provided for a number of offences relating to the disclosure of confidential information to unauthorized persons.2 Otherwise, disclosure of confidential information lies within the scope of the civil law and, being equitable, the law of confidence has proven to be reasonably flexible and a particularly useful adjunct to other intellectual property rights.
Whereas other rights such as copyright and patents are particularly useful when the subject matter is made public by exploitation by the right owner, the law of breach of confidence gives protection to things not released to the public or even part of the public. Indeed, this is the whole point of the law of confidence and its most useful feature is that an injunction can be obtained preventing an anticipated wrongful release or use of the information that is the subject matter of the confidence. In terms of patent law, confidence is vital to the grant of a patent as it is essential that details of the invention do not fall into the public domain before the filing of the patent application, otherwise the patent will be refused.3 Confidence protects the invention and its detail. In some circumstances the inventor may decide to keep his invention secret in preference to obtaining a patent as the latter only gives a maximum of 20 years' protection. It depends on whether the information can be kept secret. As regards copyright, it has been seen that, as a matter of principle, copyright does not protect ideas, only the expression of ideas. However, confidence can and does protect ideas but only until such time as those ideas are published in some way.
DEVELOPMENT OF THE LAW OF BREACH OF CONFIDENCE
The law of breach of confidence has had an erratic history. It largely developed in a spurt in the early to middle of the nineteenth century and then lay relatively dormant until the late 1940s when it was realized that this was an extremely useful area of law. Some of the early cases involved `patent medicines'. There was obviously a lot of money to be made from these magic cures, bearing in mind that conventional medicine was still fairly primitive at this time and the public at large was relatively ignorant and uneducated. In Morison v Moat,4 such a medicine was made known as 'Morison's Vegetable Universal Medicine'. There was a dispute between the son of the person who originally devised the recipe and the partner, Thomas Moat, who had improperly told his own son of the recipe. It was held that there was an equity against the defendant. It was a breach of faith and of contract by the partner, Thomas Moat, to tell his son of the secret who, therefore, derived his knowledge under a breach of faith and of contract and could not claim a title to the recipe. Although the term `breach of confidence' was not used at this stage, it was clear that the breach of faith was actionable per se and was not dependant upon the existence of a contract. There was no contractual relationship between the son of the originator of the recipe and the son of the defendant.
Another important case which helped establish this area of law concerned etchings made by Queen Victoria and Prince Albert. The case is Prince Albert v Strange.5 The Queen and Prince Albert made etchings for their own amusement, intended only for their own private entertainment, although they sometimes had prints made to give to friends. Some of the etchings were sent to a printer for impressions (prints) to be made from them. Whilst at the printers, it seemed that someone surreptitiously made some additional prints which came into the hands of the defendant who intended to display the prints in an exhibition to which the public could go on payment of an admission charge. The defendant advertised his intention to hold the exhibition and was sued by the Queen's Consort. It was held that relief would be given against the defendant even though he was a third party. The defendant had argued that the prints were not improperly taken but it was said that his possession must have originated in a breach of trust, a breach of confidence or a breach of contract and, therefore, an injunction was granted preventing the exhibition. Again, it was clear that relief was available without having to rely on a contractual relationship.
THE MODERN LAW OF BREACH OF CONFIDENCE
The law of breach of confidence began its renaissance about 40 or 50 years ago. It became apparent that this area of law was extremely well suited to protecting `industrial property' during the development stages before other legal rights were able to afford protection.6 Indeed, some industrialists had come to the conclusion that it was better to keep some details of their processes secret rather than obtain a patent which would mean that, eventually, the idea would fall into the public domain. However, it seems as if the significance of this area of law was not fully appreciated by law reporters. A number of important cases were reported in some series of law reports retrospectively, several years after the disposal of the cases.
The first major case on the law of breach of confidence that laid the foundations for its modern form was Saltman Engineering Co. Ltd. v Campbell Engineering Co. Ltd.7 The plaintiff owned the copyright in drawings of tools for use in the manufacture of leather punches. The defendant was given the drawings and instructed to make 5,000 of the tools at 3s 6d each. After completing the order, the defendant retained the drawings and made use of them for his own purposes. In finding for the plaintiff, holding that there was an implied condition that the defendant should treat the drawings as confidential and not make other use of them and should deliver the drawings with the tools made pursuant to the agreement,$ Lord Greene MR described the nature of confidential information thus: .	 The information, to be confidential, must, I apprehend, apart from contract, have the necessary quality of confidence about it, namely, it must not be something which is public property and public knowledge. On the other hand, it is perfectly possible to have a confidential document, be it a formula, a plan, a sketch, or something of that kind, which is the result of work done by the maker upon materials which may be available for the use of anybody; but what makes it confidential is the fact that the maker of the document has used his brain and thus produced a result which can only be produced by somebody who goes through the same process .9
Lord Greene also emphasized that an obligation of confidence is not limited to cases where the parties are in a contractual relationship, that the law will prevent an abuse of position by the recipient of confidential information. He also indicated that there need be nothing special about the information concerned and that others may be able to derive the information for themselves but will need to invest some effort to obtain that information. In other words, the recipient of confidential information will be prevented from making unfair use of the information outside that contemplated by the person giving it. It can be said that a person fixed with a duty of confidence is in an analogous position to that of a trustee; however, in the case of a person fixed with an obligation of confidence, the nature of that duty is always negative, that is he must not use or divulge the information outside the authority given to him by his confidant.
Megarry J further developed the action of breach of confidence and laid down a good working formula for the application of this area of law in the case of Coco v A N Clark (Engineers) Ltd.10 The plaintiff, one Marco Paolo Coco, designed a moped engine and had entered into informal negotiations with the defendant with a view to the latter manufacturing the engine. In the end the negotiations broke down and no contract was executed between the plaintiff and the defendant. The plaintiff suggested that the defendant had deliberately caused the break down in negotiations with a view to making the engine without paying the plaintiff. When the defendant decided to manufacture its own engine to a design which closely resembled the plaintiff's design, the plaintiff sought an interlocutory injunction to prevent the defendant using confidential information given by the plaintiff for the purposes of a proposed joint venture.
Megarry J stated that the doctrine of confidence required three elements as follows:
(a) The information must have the necessary quality of confidence about it (using Lord Greene's definition in Saltman).
(b) The information must have been imparted in circumstances importing an obligation of confidence.
(c) There must be an unauthorized use of that information to the detriment of the party communicating it.
However, the plaintiff was not granted an injunction and had, at best, a weak case. Where information was communicated in the expectation that the plaintiff would be paid, it was doubtful whether an injunction was an appropriate remedy if there was subsequently a dispute. Megarry J ordered that the defendant should give an undertaking to pay a royalty of five shillings per engine made into a special joint bank account on trusts should the defendant manufacture the engines., pending the full trial The formula used by Megarry J forms a useful basis for exploring the nature and scope of the law of breach of confidence and is used as a framework for the discussion in the following chapter.
The equitable nature of the law of breach of confidence was stressed by Ungoed-Thomas J in Duchess of Argyll v Duke of Argyll 11 where he said:
These cases [Prince Albert v Strange, etc.] in my view indicate (1) that a contract or obligation of confidence need not be expressed but can be implied ... (2) that a breach of confidence or trust or faith can arise independently of any right of property or contract other, of course, than any contract which the imparting of the confidence in the relevant circumstances may itself create; (3) that the court in the exercise of its equitable jurisdiction will restrain a breach of confidence independently of any right at law.
It is clear that an obligation will be implied in many situations but, as Ungoed-Thomas J acknowledges, the obligation may be created expressly by way of a contract (an express contractual obligation may run alongside or replace an obligation that would otherwise be imposed by equity). For example, a contract of employment or service may include terms imposing an obligation of confidence on one or both parties. Further, in some contracts, the subject matter may be confidential information itself, for example where a designer gives details of his design to a manufacturer in return for royalties.
Being rooted in equity, the law of confidence retains a useful flexibility and it has been developed at an extraordinary rate by the courts over the last three or four decades. Nevertheless, the Law Commission recommended that this area of law be codified and a draft Bill was produced in 1981.12 A major advantage of the law of breach of confidence has been its flexibility and the way in which it has been developed by the courts, freed from the straightjacket of statutory interpretation. It might be wondered, therefore, what would be gained by codifying this area of law, which works reasonably effectively, to replace it with sterile legislation. The Law Commission must have appreciated this as much of the draft Bill is couched in general terms and, indeed, the Law Commission stated:
... we should emphasise that the legislative framework which we envisage would allow the Courts wide scope in applying its principles to differing situations and changing social circumstances. 13
If this is the basis upon which the legislation would be founded it is difficult to see what advantage would be gained by its promulgation. Widely drafted legislation might have some unfortunate and unpredictable effects whilst the track
record of the courts in developing this area of common law has been good and there is no reason to believe that judicial common sense cannot provide for the future satisfactory development of the law of confidence. Such considerations may account for the fact that no moves have been made to codify the law of confidence and it would seem that codification is extremely unlikely in the foreseeable future.14
One area the draft Bill addressed was the position of persons improperly acquiring information, for example by industrial espionage. In many cases in the law of confidence, the information concerned has been divulged deliberately by the person who `owns' the information. However, where a person acquires information by eavesdropping or other means such as computer hacking or other unauthorized taking or copying of information, it has not been clear whether an obligation of confidence exists. Perhaps the difficulty stems from one of the guidelines laid down by Megarry J in Coco v A N Clark (Engineers) Ltd.,15 that is that the information must have been imparted in circumstances importing an obligation of confidence. This is an important point as, because of developments and improvements in areas of technology such as telecommunications, it is much easier for determined people to gain access to confidential information on a world-wide basis. In the case of Prince Albert v Strange,16 the court did not know how the prints came into the defendant's possession, only that the prints must have been made surreptitiously. Nevertheless, the court was willing to give relief. It is possible that the principle as associated with this case can be applied to computer hackers and other persons gaining access to confidential material without permission, that is in respect to the improper acquisition of information, and that Megarry J's test is unduly restrictive.
One final point that should be made before going on to examine the law of breach of confidence in more depth is that it has an Achilles' heel. An obligation of confidence cannot attach to a person who acquires the information innocently, without appreciating its confidential nature. Therefore, innocent third parties are generally free to use or divulge the information to others. The information has, in effect, fallen into the public domain and may be used freely. There would still be remedies against any person, owing an obligation of confidence who divulged the information to others or made use of the information without authority or permission. However, there is nothing the owner of the confidential information can do about others who have come into possession of the information in circumstances where they could not have appreciated that it was confidential apart from relying on the law of copyright or patent law, if appropriate. For example, if the confidential information is contained in a printed list of customers and a third party is given a copy of the list which he receives in good faith then the third party will be able to put the information to use by contacting the customers providing he does not make copies of the list. Of course, the circumstances in which the third party obtains the list should be such that he does not realize that the information is likely to be confidential; this is probably an objective test. That is, the circumstances and the nature of the information are such that it would be reasonable for the third party not to have realized that the information was confidential.


12
Nature o f the law o f confidence 
INTRODUCTION
There is no fundamental right to privacy at English law. The law of confidence should not be confused with privacy. Invasions against privacy can be dealt with by an action for defamation or malicious falsehood but this course may not always be satisfactory, as in Kaye v Robertsonl in which a journalist and a photographer gained access to Mr Gordon Kaye's private hospital room and took photographs and conducted an interview when Mr Kaye was in no fit state to be interviewed or to give consent. Mr Kaye, the actor from the television comedy series 'Allo 'Allo had, whilst driving, been struck by a piece of wood and suffered severe head and brain injuries. In allowing in part the appeal against an injunction imposed by Potter J, the Court of Appeal judges were unanimous in their call for a legal right to privacy.2 The Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988 gives a limited right to privacy in respect of certain photographs and films.3 The law of breach of confidence may indirectly protect confidence if, for example, materials of a private nature have been shown or given to another to whom a duty of confidence attaches. The basic requirement for confidence is the existence of a duty which may be expressed or imputed from the circumstances.
The formula for a breach of confidence action given by Megarry J in Coco v A N Clark (Engineers) Ltd.4 gives a good working structure to further examine the nature and extent of this area of law. To recap, for an action in breach of confidence, the following things are required:
(a) The information must have the necessary quality of confidence about it.
(b) The information must have been imparted in circumstances importing an obligation of confidence.
(c) There must be an unauthorized use of that information to the detriment of the party communicating it.
These points will now be analysed and discussed individually. CONFIDENTIAL QUALITY
Nature of confidential quaflt
The sort of material protected may be technical, commercial or personal. Often the information will be related to commercial or industrial enterprise such as in the Coco case. The value of such information should not be taken for granted and it can be surprising how important some secrets are even though they may seem very mundane. For example, there was a dispute about a cockle bottling secret in which the cockle bottlers' greatest problem was discussed, being to achieve the right acidity level, that is strong enough to preserve the cockles
without being too strong so as to be unpleasant to tastes Secrets of a personal nature are also protected, even if relating to sexual conduct of a lurid nature. It was held in Stephens v Avery that there was no reason why such information, expressly communicated in confidence, could not be subject to an enforceable duty of confidence. The background to that case was the killing of Mrs Telling by her husband. Details of a sexual relationship between Mrs Stephens, the plaintiff, and Mrs Telling were disclosed in confidence to a friend, Mrs Avery, the defendant, who had published the information in a newspaper. Whilst a court would not protect information of a grossly immoral nature, on the basis of Glyn v Weston Feature Film Co. Ltd., the difficulty in this instance was identifying what was grossly immoral. A general code of sexual morals accepted by the overwhelming majority of the public no longer existed and there was no common view that sexual conduct between consenting adults, two females in this case, was grossly immoral.$ After all, the story was not so shocking so as to prevent the editor spreading the story across the pages of a major national newspaper for personal profit and it lay ill in the mouth of the defendant to claim that the law did not protect the confidentiality of information of this sort.
An objective test is applied to determine whether information is truly confidential. Simply marking a document with the words `PRIVATE AND CONFIDENTIAL' will not suffice if the contents are commonplace and lie within the public domain such as a simple, straightforward recipe for bread which contains nothing unusual in terms of the ingredients or the methods to be employed in the mixing and baking of the dough. In Dalrymple's Application a manufacturer distributed over 1,000 technical bulletins to members of a trade association, marking them `CONFIDENTIAL' and including a statement on the front of the documents to the effect that the contents were not to be divulged to non-members. The material in the bulletins could not be regarded as confidential. Even distribution of a report marked `PRIVATE AND CONFIDENTIAL' to only 10 out of 350 members of the British Cast Iron Research Association was fatal to confidentiality. 10
The information does not have to be particularly special in any way and a compilation of already known information such as a list of customers can, when taken as a whole, be regarded as confidential. What makes such information worth protecting by confidence is the fact that time and effort has been expended in gathering, selecting and ordering the information. In other words, a competitor should not be permitted to take a short cut by `stealing' information belonging to someone else - he should have to go through a similar process and discover the information for himself by his own labours. 1 1
In Thomas Marshall (Exports) v Guinle,12 the defendant was appointed as the managing director of the plaintiff company for ten years. The company's business largely concerned the purchase of clothing from Eastern Europe and the Far East and the sale of such clothing to retail outlets. The defendant's service agreement stated that he was not to engage in any other business without the company's consent and that he must not disclose confidential information. Further, after ceasing to be the managing director, he was not to use or disclose confidential information about the suppliers and customers of the plaintiff company. The defendant began to trade on his own account and on behalf of two companies in competition with the plaintiff company. When his
service contract had another four-and-a-half years left to run, he purported to resign. It was held that the court would restrain the defendant from committing further breaches of his employment contract and that an interim injunction would be granted in respect of the defendant's breach of obligation of fidelity and good faith to his employer. Megarry VC suggested that four elements were important when testing for confidential quality:
(a) The information must be such that the owner believes that its release would be injurious to him or would be advantageous to his rivals or to others.
(b) The owner of the information must believe it to be confidential or secret and not already in the public domain.
(c) The owner's belief in (a) and (b) above must be reasonable.
(d) The information must be judged in the light of usages and practices of the particular trade or industry concerned.
According to this test, a certain amount of subjectivity is allowed on the part of the owner of the information but this is restricted by the requirement that the owner's beliefs must be reasonable. On this basis, it is possible .that a duty of confidence could arise and attract legal remedies even if the information is actually in the public domain if the owner's contrary belief is reasonable. However, this is going too far and the author is not aware of any cases where information already in the public domain has been held to be confidential. Ultimately, the test must be objective.	
Trade secret
The term `trade secret' is often used in relation to confidential information associated with industrial and commercial activity. The classification of some forms of confidential information as trade secrets is important because the protection afforded by the law may depend upon it. Unfortunately, there is no satisfactory legal definition of the term.13
In Herbert Morris Ltd v Saxelby,14 Lord Atkinson spoke of trade secrets thus (at 705):
... trade secrets, such as prices, &c., or any secret process or things of a nature which the man [ the defendant] was not entitled to reveal.
In that case, Lord Parker distinguished between detail: confidential information that was far too detailed to be carried away in the head was a trade secret whereas a general method or scheme that could be easily remembered cannot be regarded as a trade secret. At first instance, in Faccenda Chicken Ltd. v Fowler15 Goulding J defined three classes of information being:
(a) information which, because of its trivial character or its easy accessibility from public sources, cannot be regarded as confidential,
(b) information which an employee must treat as confidential, but which, once learned, reasonably remains in the employee's head and becomes part of his skill and experience,
(c) specific trade secrets so confidential that a continuing duty of confidence applies even beyond the termination of employment or service contract. This classification provides little guidance as to what precisely distinguishes a trade secret from information in the second category but it does show that such
information will be given less protection. In a restraint of trade case, Lansing Linde Ltd. v Kerr,16 Staughton LJ spoke in terms of information that would be liable to cause real harm if it was disclosed to a competitor, provided it was used in a trade or business and the owner had either limited the dissemination of the information or at least not encouraged or permitted widespread publication. Butler-Sloss LJ stressed the need to take account of the changing nature of business and the need to take account of:
... the wider context of highly confidential information of a non-technical or nonscientific nature ... 17
Whilst it is clear that a secret industrial process containing an inventive step is capable of being a trade secret, the position is less predictable in terms 'of confidential price lists, databases containing customer names and addresses and clients' accounts. The test of what can be remembered does not help as many new inventions may be easily remembered. Neither would it be realistic to limit trade secrets to inventions that are potentially patentable. Information relating to clients' credit ratings and the types of goods that they buy may be very valuable and, in the right circumstances, fall to be considered a trade secret. In PSM International plc & McKechnie plc v Whitehouse & Willenhall Automation Ltd.18 drawings, quotations, price costing and business strategies were considered to rank as trade secrets.
Publication
If the information has been published or disclosed to third parties, it falls into the public domain and the law of confidence cannot prevent its subsequent use and further disclosure. A person who has received the information in circumstances such that he was not, or could not reasonably have been, aware of the confidential nature is free to make use of that information or to pass it on to others. However, even if the information has fallen into the hands of third parties because of a breach of confidence, there will be remedies available against the person in breach. When a patent is applied for, the specification of the invention is available for public inspection 18 months after the priority date. The protection afforded by the law of confidence is then lost, to be replaced by the patent, once granted.19 The information is in the public domain even though it may be available only after a search at the Patent Office. In Mustad & Son v Dosen,20 a case concerning information about a machine for the manufacture of fish hooks, it was held that publication through the master by obtaining a patent effectively destroys the servant's duty of confidence in respect of the subject-matter of the patent grant. However, this principle has been distinguished as regards a patent obtained by a third party.
In Cranleigh Precision Engineering Ltd v Bryant,21 Bryant was the managing director of the plaintiff company which manufactured above ground swimming pools invented by Bryant. No patent had been granted in respect of the plaintiff's swimming pools. Patent agents, acting on behalf of the plaintiff informed Bryant of a rival invention known as the Bischoff patent which concerned a similar swimming pool but which lacked two special features which the plaintiff's design incorporated.22 Bryant did not inform his codirectors of the Bischoff patent. Later, Bryant left and set up his own company and obtained an assignment of the Bischoff patent. He was sued, inter alia, for
injunctions to restrain him and his company from making use of or disclosing information relating to the plaintiff's swimming pools.
It was argued on behalf of the defendant that, because knowledge of the Bischoff patent was in the public domain, there could be no breach of confidence. However, although details of the Bischoff patent could be inspected by anyone it was especially relevant to the plaintiff because of the possible effect of the Bischoff patent on the plaintiff's swimming pools and the possibility of a conflict over rights. Bryant had acted in breach of confidence in making use, as soon as he left the plaintiff's employ, of the information concerning the Bischoff patent and its various effects on the plaintiff's position. The case of Mustad & Son v Dosen was distinguished on the grounds that, in that case, the patent was granted to the master (employer), that is, publication was by the master of the person alleged to have committed the breach of confidence. In Cranleigh Precision Engineering Ltd. v Bryant, the publication was by another, Bryant's `master' (the plaintiff) had never published anything, not even the specification for their swimming pool.
If the information has found its way into the public domain, the person who owed another an obligation of confidence in respect of that information may be prevented from making use of the information himself for a period of time. This is known as the `springboard' doctrine. The person who was under an obligation of confidence is not allowed to use it as a springboard from which to launch his own project if to do so would be harmful to the person to whom the obligation was owed. In Terrapin v Builders Supply Co. (Hayes) Ltd.23 it was said by Roxburgh J that:
... a person who has obtained information in confidence is not allowed to use it as a springboard for activities detrimental to [the owner] and springboard it remains even when all the features have been published . . . 24
However, the springboard effect does not last indefinitely. After all, if the information has been published, others are free to use it so why should the person who originally owed an obligation of confidence be restricted? Of course, one justification is that the information has been published because of a breach of that obligation. In Roger Bullivant Ltd. v Ellis,25 the plaintiffs specialized in a type of construction work known as underpinning. This is a means of replacing defective foundations. The defendant who had been an employee of the plaintiff, with others, set up a rival business. It was discovered that the defendant had taken a copy of a card index of customers which had been compiled by the plaintiff. The defendant had deliberately made use of the card index and could not complain if the court restrained him from using it even though his obligation of confidence as an ex-employee was weaker and he would have been free to use information that he had simply remembered. It was said that the springboard doctrine would not normally extend beyond the period for which the unfair advantage gained would reasonably be expected to remain and the purpose of an injunction in such circumstances was not to punish the defendant but to protect the plaintiff. It was argued that the information was freely available elsewhere but, on the basis of Robb v Green26 it was said that the defendant could not complain if the law was unable to distinguish between the information he was able to use and that which he could not.
Public Interest
As with copyright, a defence of public interest is available in an action for breach of confidence. Of course, in many cases where this is relevant, there will be issues of both confidence and copyright such as where someone publishes a confidential document.27 The courts will not respect an obligation of confidence if it is in the public interest that the confidential information is made known to the public at large or to a restricted class of the public, such as an official body. Public interest is relevant where it concerns the administration of justice - for example, the law of confidence cannot be used as a means of suppressing information concerning criminal conduct.28 But it is wider than that and can cover matters about religion,29 price-fixing30 and about persons in the public eye. Three points about public interest are considered below; that is, where the proposed publication is potentially defamatory, where there is a conflict in public interests and, finally, as regards the scope and nature of the disclosure.
Potentially defamatory publication
It is recognized that the public has an interest in the truth. If a person intends to publish material which is clearly defamatory, there is little doubt that the courts would, if asked, grant an injunction preventing publication unless the defendant pleads justification. However, if a person has obtained information in confidence which might injure the reputation of another, he may be free to publish it if such publication can be said to lie within the public interest. This will apply particularly to information concerning the character of persons in the public limelight such as politicians and showbusiness personalities who actively seek publicity. Of course, public interest can only be realized if the information is true, and the courts will not usually restrain publication if the person intending to publish the information is likely to raise the defences of justification or fair comment if sued for defamation. In this respect, there is something to be said for the `publish and be damned' attitude of the Duke of Wellington. After all, the aggrieved party has, if the information is untrue, remedies under the tort of defamation which can be quite effective bearing in mind the burden of proof in such an action.
In Woodward v Hutchins,31 the defendant (Hutchins) was a public relations officer who worked for the plaintiffs, who were pop singers including Tom Jones, Englebert Humperdinck and Gilbert O'Sullivan. The singers wanted to be presented to the public in the best possible light in order to encourage large audiences to attend their concerts. The defendant went on tour with the singers and saw their `goings on'. Later, when no longer engaged by the plaintiffs, he wrote articles about the plaintiffs' discreditable conduct including a case of adultery; it was a typical `Sunday paper' story. The first article was published and the singers applied for an injunction to prevent further articles being published on the grounds that they were defamatory and had been written in breach of confidence. Lord Denning said that the public interest in the truth outweighed the public interest in protecting confidential information in this case. The remaining articles could be published, leaving the plaintiffs free to pursue a claim for damages in libel. The defendant had made it clear that he would plead justification if sued for defamation. An important factor in the decision is that the plaintiffs had sought publicity which was favourable to
them and they could not, therefore, complain if the public were given true information showing them in a less favourable light.
This case can be seen as a considerable extension of the public interest defence to breach of confidence but it should be treated with care, considering its particular facts. For example, public interest would not apply if the person about whom the information applied had not previously sought publicity. One way of looking at Woodward v Hutchins is to say that it is really an instance of the public being disabused of a misrepresentation previously made to it by or on behalf on the plaintiffs.
Conflict of differing public interests
There may be more than one type of public interest involved where confidential information is concerned. Public interest can be served by the disclosure of certain types of information to a limited section of the public or to the public at large, depending on the nature of the information. However, the public interest can be best served by maintaining confidences generally, that is by discouraging potential breaches of confidences by a strong and certain law. For example, the public interest in maintaining confidences between doctors and their patients is extremely high. Sometimes there will be a conflict between these forms of public interest and the court must balance one against the other in coming to its decision.
In W v Edgell,32 W had killed five people and had been diagnosed as suffering from paranoid schizophrenia. At his trial, his plea of diminished responsibility was accepted and he was detained without time limit under sections 60 and 65 of the Mental Health Act 1959.33 Later, W's condition improved and his doctor recommended transfer to a regional secure unit. The doctor said that the illness was under control and W was no longer a danger provided he stayed on medication. The Home Secretary refused his consent to the transfer. W applied to a mental health review tribunal for discharge or transfer. Dr Edgell was instructed to examine W and make out a report. The report was unfavourable to W and Dr Edgell sent a copy to W's solicitor in the belief that it would be placed before the tribunal but W's solicitor withdrew the application. Dr Edgell heard of this and realized that there would not be a copy of his report on W's file for future reference. Being concerned at this, Dr Edgell sent a copy of his report to the Home Secretary. W complained that this was a breach of the confidential relationship between a patient and a doctor.
In the High Court, it was said that Dr Edgell owed a duty of confidence to W which was created and circumscribed by the particular circumstances of the case. Dr Edgell considered that W had a psychopathic personality and thought that W's solicitors intended to suppress the report. Because of this, Scott J considered that Dr Edgell also owed a duty to the public which required him to place before the proper authorities the results of his examination of W who was not an ordinary member of the public. W unsuccessfully appealed to the Court of Appeal. It was held that, although W had a personal interest to see that confidence he had reposed in Dr Edgell was not breached, the maintenance of a duty of confidence by a doctor to his patient was not a matter of private but of public interest. The public interest in maintaining confidence had to be balanced with the public interest in protecting others from possible violence. In
