this case, the public interest in restrictive disclosure outweighed the public interest that W's confidences should be respected. Bingham LJ said:
Only the most compelling circumstances could justify a doctor in acting in a way which would injure the immediate interests of his patient, as the patient perceived them, without obtaining his consent.34
On the facts, Dr. Edgell acted very responsibly and, it would appear, under a sense of public duty. It is clear that breach of confidence in a relationship as sensitive as between doctor and patient would be legally permissible only under the most compelling and narrow circumstances.

Scope and nature of the disclosure
It is clear that, in some circumstances, whether the public interest defence applies depends on the scope and nature of the disclosure. Sometimes, a very restrictive disclosure will be appropriate such as in W v Edgell, and had that particular disclosure been made to a newspaper, the defendant would probably have lost his public interest defence. If there is a public interest in the disclosure, the judges will take into account the persons to whom the confidential information is communicated. For example, the public interest might be best served by disclosure to a responsible body rather than to the media.35 Another, often related, factor might be whether the disclosure was done for gain or reward although this is not decisive.36
Simply because the confidentiality of information is breached for one particular purpose does not mean that it can be used for other purposes. Certain documents were seized legally by the police investigating a fraud case in Marcel v Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis.37 It was held that the police were not entitled to disclose those documents to a third party to use in civil proceedings because the public interest in ensuring that the documents were used solely for public purposes appropriate to the powers of seizure conferred on the police outweighed the public interest in ensuring that all relevant information was available in civil proceedings. The police had a duty not to disclose such documents to third parties except by the order of the court. This case also provides another example of a conflict between two competing public interests.
OBLIGATION OF CONFIDENCE
The second requirement for an action in breach of confidence is that there must be an obligation of confidence which arises from the circumstances in which the information was imparted.38 This obligation may arise by express agreement or prior notice or it may be implied by law, for example in a fiduciary relationship. Commonly, an obligation of confidence will be established and delineated by a contract which has express terms dealing with confidence or, in the absence of such terms, by implied terms depending on the nature of the contract. The obligation of confidence may extend beyond the termination of the contract. However, a contract is not essential and, frequently, the obligation will arise in preliminary negotiations for a contract even though the contract is never executed. It is axiomatic that an obligation of confidence will apply
where there is a duty of good faith, for example between doctor and patient or between solicitor and client. However, the circumstances where the obligation will be appropriate are much wider than this and include business transactions, commercial negotiations, the relationship between husband and wife and, sometimes, disclosures to third parties. Four particular issues are considered below: express contractual terms imposing a duty of confidence, the employer/employee relationship, covenants in restraint of trade and the position of third party recipients.
Express contractual term
It is quite common for formal contracts to contain terms dealing with matters of confidence and imposing a duty on one or both parties not to use or disclose certain types of information. A computer software company engaged to write and install computer programs for a client will be expected not to divulge any details of the client's business to competitors. An advertising agency asked by a drinks manufacturer to mount an advertising campaign for a new brand of lager will be under a duty not to disclose information about the new product until after its launch. Of course, there will be an equitable duty but expressly providing for the duty in a contract means that it can be more stringent and focused in its scope. Breach of confidence will then constitute a breach of contract giving contractual remedies to the aggrieved party. Terms dealing with confidence, often imposing a reciprocal duty, are common in contracts between business organizations, between consultants and businesses engaging them and between employers and their employees, as discussed later.
As with any contractual term care must be taken in the drafting. The courts will not impose a duty of confidence to benefit a person other than that intended. In Fraser v Evans,39 the plaintiff was a public relations consultant who had been engaged by the Greek government to prepare a report. The contract included an express term stating that the plaintiff must not divulge any of the information contained in the report during or after the currency of the contract. A copy of the report had been surreptitiously obtained and came into the hands of The Sunday Times. The plaintiff was granted an ex parte order restraining publication of the report or parts of it in the newspaper on the grounds that it would be defamatory and would be a breach of confidence. The plaintiff considered that an article based on the report would show him in a bad light. On the defendant's appeal, it was held that the plaintiff was not entitled to an injunction. Although the plaintiff owed a duty to the Greek government, no reciprocal duty was imposed by the contract, nor could such a duty be implied. The courts can only give effect to an obligation of confidence at the instance of the party to whom such obligation is owed. It was also held, obiter, that although the plaintiff owned the copyright in the report, this did not extend to preventing the use of the information contained within it, once again illustrating the distinction between idea and expression in copyright.
When items are distributed to the public or a limited section of the public, it can be assumed that confidential information embodied within those items will automatically lose its confidential quality and the person obtaining one of the items will not owe an obligation of confidence to its manufacturer. Other branches of intellectual property law are more appropriate such as patent law
and copyright law. However, if the distribution occurs by way of a contract, the contract may include terms attempting to impose a continuing duty of confidence, for example by prohibiting dismantling or reverse engineering. In K S Paul (Printing Machinery) Ltd. v Southern Instruments Ltd.,40 there were two defendants. The second defendant hired from the plaintiff a telephone answering machine which was enclosed in a box which concealed the workings of the machine. The contract of hire included a condition that the machine should not be removed from its installation position nor should it be interfered with. The machines were not available except under such conditions. The second defendant allowed the first defendant to remove the machine, dismantle and examine it. Access to the confidential information concerning the workings of the machine was thus obtained. An injunction was granted to the plaintiff restraining the use of confidential information obtained from the `machines of the type hired by the plaintiffs ... from any unlawful inspection of any such machines'. The contract of hire had effectively prolonged the effectiveness of confidence and applied to a third party who had been allowed by the hirer to dismantle the machine.
It is arguable that sales to the general public may not destroy the application of the law of breach of confidence if, by the very nature of the product, the secret information is not accessible or is only accessible after doing something which infringes some right or duty.41 For example, if a computer program is licensed in object code form, the licensee, or any other person for that matter, will not be able to gain access to the ideas locked away in the program without carrying out reverse analysis of the program, an operation that will normally infringe the copyright subsisting in the program, unless falling within the scope of the permitted acts under copyright law.
Employer/employee relationship
An employee owes a duty of confidence to his employer and this duty may be expressly stated in the contract of employment and in any case will be implied by law. It can be said that an employee always has a duty to act in his employer's best interests together with a duty of good faith and this will obviously include a duty not to divulge confidential information about his employer's business to others without the consent of the employer. The sort of information concerned may be rather special, a `trade secret' such as details of a technique to improve the strength or durability of a type of plastic, or it may be ordinary and mundane, such as details of the customers of the employer. There may be exceptions to this duty, for example if the information pertains to a criminal offence or it is in the public interest that the information is disclosed.
There is seldom any doubt about the duty owed by a present employee. Although the law will be quick to imply a duty of confidence, inclusion of terms dealing with this in a contract of employment at least have the effect of focusing the employee's attention on the question of confidence. If there are express terms in the contract of employment which attempt to strengthen this duty they must, of course, be clear and unambiguous.
Ex-employees
Many problems arise through the use or disclosure of confidential information by ex-employees and here the law is faced with a dilemma for, not only does
the employer have an interest in maintaining confidence, but the employee has a competing interest in that he should be free to use his skill and knowledge to earn a living elsewhere. Much of attractiveness of a potential employee to other employers will be the fact that he has built up skill and experience in his previous employments and it may be difficult to separate this from a previous employer's confidential information. As a further complication, in some cases, the employment contract may contain terms trying to restrict an employee's use of confidential materials after the termination of employment. When there are no express terms, the employer will not be protected to any great extent. For example, if an ex-employee simply remembers some information about a few of his previous employer's customers there would be nothing to prevent the ex employee using this information himself or putting it at the disposal of his new employer. Of course, it would be different if he deliberately memorized the customers' names or made a copy of them.42 In the absence of an express term in the contract of employment dealing with confidentiality, it was said in Printers and Finishers Ltd. v Hollo way that there would be nothing improper in the employee putting his memory of particular features of his previous employer's plant at the disposal of his new employer. Even if there is an express term, the previous employer would have to show that the information was over and above the employee's normal skill in the job and amounted to a trade secret.
In Northern Office Microcomputer (Pty.) Ltd. v Rosenstein,44 a case from the Supreme Court of South Africa involving the laws of copyright and trade secrets relating to computer programs, the problem of where to draw the line between the conflicting interests of an employee and his previous employer was considered. It was conceded by Marais J that:
... the dividing line between the use by an employee of his own skill knowledge and experience and the use by him of his employer's trade secrets is notoriously difficult to draw.
In recognizing that computer programs that were not commonplace should be eligible for protection as trade secrets, Marais J said that the protection given by the law of trade secrets in the context of ex-employees should be of a limited nature only and that all that should be protected was the employer's `lead-time', the time to develop the program. That is, the advantage the employer has in getting his product to the market place first should be protected and nothing more. He went on to say that, in many cases, the employer's trade secrets were no more than the result of the application by an employee of his own skill and judgment, but if the employee was engaged specifically to produce that information then it can still amount to a trade secret. However, if the material was commonplace, there would be nothing to stop the ex-employee deriving the same or similar material again as long as he did not simply copy his employer's material. The employee would not have to `wipe the slate of his mind clean' on the termination of his employment.
A test for employees and ex-employees' obligation of confidence
An important case which clarified the principles to apply in the employer/ employee relationship is Faccenda Chicken Ltd. v Fowler.46 This was about the alleged wrongful use by the defendant ex-employee, with a wonderfully
appropriate surname, of his employer's sales information, customers' names and addresses, the most convenient routes to customers, the most suitable times for delivery, prices charged and details of customers' usual orders, information which was, by its very nature fairly mundane and ordinary, but which was nevertheless, still within the scope of the law of breach of confidence. The employer's business was supplying fresh chickens from itinerant refrigerated vans to retailers and caterers. The defendant was engaged by the plaintiff as a sales manager and left the plaintiff company to set up in business on his own account, taking eight of the plaintiff's employees with him. He started selling fresh chickens from refrigerated vans in the same area that the plaintiff operated in. The employer's action for breach of confidence failed because the information was not of the type which an employee was bound, by an implied term in his contract of employment, not to use or disclose subsequent to the termination of employment. Neill LJ, delivering the judgment of the court, stated the Court of Appeal's views on the relevant principles to apply in cases involving confidentiality between master and servant:
(a) If there is a contract of employment the employee's obligations were to be determined from that contract.
(b) In the absence of any express terms, the employee's obligations would be implied.
(c) Whilst still in employment, there was an implied term imposing a duty of good faith or fidelity on the employee. This duty might vary according to the nature of the contract but would be broken if the employee copied or deliberately memorized a list of customers.
(d) The implied term imposing an obligation on the employee after the termination of his employment was more restricted than that imposed by the duty of fidelity. It might cover secret processes of manufacture or designs or special methods of construction or other information of a sufficiently high degree of confidentiality so as to be classed as a trade secret.
(e) To determine whether information fell within this implied term to prevent its use or disclosure by an ex-employee depended on the circumstances and attention should be given to the following:
(i)	the nature of employment - a higher obligation might be imposed where the employee regularly handled confidential material;
(ii)	the nature of information - it should be an authentic trade secret or at least highly confidential;
(iii)	whether the employer stressed the confidential nature of the material; and
(iv) whether the information could be easily isolated from other material the employee was free to use, this being useful evidentially rather than being a conclusive test.
On the last point, separability of information would tend to suggest that it was more likely that the information could be classed as confidential. The court left open the question of whether it would make any difference if the ex employee used the information himself or whether he simply sold it to another. Although the decision in this case seems a trifle unfair in that the ex-employee calculatingly and deliberately took advantage of his employer's business and
reputation it can be argued that the employer should have considered using a restrictive covenant which might have prevented the employee from competing in the area for at least a year or two. However, Mr Fowler was walking a thin line for in Normalec v Britton47 the defendant decided to sell the same goods as his employer (electric bulbs and fittings) to the same customers he had been seeing on behalf of his employer. Worse still, the defendant did this while he was still in the employ of the plaintiff. The defendant was held to have a fiduciary duty to his employer who was entitled to the profits made by the defendant and the court also granted an injunction preventing the defendant from selling to the plaintiff's customers even after the termination of his employment.48 The one major difference between this case and the Faccenda Chicken case is that here the activity was commenced whilst the defendant was still employed and while he still was under a duty of good faith or fidelity to his employer 49
Employer's obligation
The obligation of confidence arising from a contract of employment is not all one way. In many cases, the employer will owe a duty of confidence to his employees. An employer will hold information concerning the employee such as marital status, salary and career details. This information should not be divulged to others without the employee's permission except in circumstances where disclosure is permitted by express provision (for example, in pursuance of an attachment of earnings order) or implied (for example, where salaries are calculated and paid by a third party). If the employee's details are stored on a computer, there will usually be restrictions on disclosure by virtue of section 5(2) of the Data Protection Act 1984.51 Prospective employers also owe a duty of confidence in respect of curricula vitae submitted by job applicants.
Some employers operate employee suggestions schemes, usually with the possibility of rewards for suggestions having merit that will be used by the employer. By taking part in the scheme, an employee can be said to have waived his rights, if any, in the information he has disclosed in this way if his employer uses the information.
However, if the employer does not make use of the information it seems that a duty of confidence will arise. In Prout v British Gas pIc the plaintiff, whilst employed by the defendant, submitted an idea for a new design of bracket for warning lamps placed around excavations. The bracket was supposed to be vandal-proof. The plaintiff was given an award by the defendant on the basis of its suggestions scheme but, later, the defendant said that it had no interest and agreed to allow the plaintiff to pursue a patent application on his own behalf. On the issue of confidence, it was held that there was a contractual or equitable duty of confidence imposed on the defendant, the employer. Although this duty would normally end once the idea was used in public for the first time without any objection from the employee, a fresh duty could arise if the employee gave notice of his intention to apply for a patent and would continue until the filing date of the application. In this particular case it was held that the employer was in breach of confidence by making use of the invention. This extension of duty beyond the first consensual public use could only apply where long-term trade or commercial secrecy was possible or where an application for legal protection
requiring novelty was envisaged. However, public use could easily destroy novelty and would do so in many cases.
Covenants in restraint of trade
An employer must be careful not to draft terms which are too wide in a contract of employment imposing a continuing duty of confidence after the employment has been terminated  Terms that are too wide are in danger of being struck out by a court as being in restraint of trade. On appointment, an employee may agree to sign a contract restricting his use or disclosure of information concerning his employer's business or agreeing not to work for a competitor after the termination of the contract of employment 55 Generally, such agreements will be enforced by the courts only if they are reasonable between the parties and not against the public interest. In particular, an employer cannot use the law of confidence to protect himself against future competition per se. If a term in the contract of employment is a clear attempt to prevent future competition rather than a legitimate means of protecting the employer's business interests, it will not be enforced by the courts.56 Restrictive terms are usually referred to as covenants in restraint of trade and are frequently expressed in terms of preventing the employee working for a competitor or setting up a business in competition within a given area and for a given period of time.57 These two factors, time and area, define the extent of the restraint. If the covenant is too wide in terms of either the courts are unlikely to enforce it and-it is clear that the two factors must be considered together. In Fitcb v Dewes,$8 a solicitor's, clerk was prohibited from entering into the employment of another solicitor within a seven mile radius of Tamworth Town Hall. The restriction was indefinite in terms of time but nevertheless, because the geographic area was small, it was held to be valid. However, in Herbert Morris Ltd. v Saxelby,59 a restriction that an engineer could not work for a competitor anywhere as an engineer for seven years was held to be void. In any case, a restrictive covenant will not be enforced:
unless the protection sought was reasonably necessary to protect a trade secret or to prevent some personal influence over customers being abused in order to entice them away.61
Geographical area will not be particularly relevant if the employer's business is carried out over the telephone or by facsimile transmission. A covenant prohibiting the former employee from carrying on a business as an employment agent within a 3,000 metre radius (about 1.9 miles) of the employer's place of business for a period of six months was held to be too wide in Office Angels Ltd. v Rainer-Tbomas.62 It was said that, as clients' orders were placed over the telephone, the location of the business was of no concern to them. Therefore, the area restriction was inappropriate.63 However, even a small area restriction could be unduly restrictive if the area was one where most of the relevant business was undertaken.
If a covenant in restraint of trade is drafted too widely it will be void. The courts will not narrow it down to an acceptable level and apply that instead. In J A Mont (UK) Ltd. v Mills,64 Simon Brown LJ said:
. . . as a matter of policy, it seems to me similarly that the court should not too urgently strive to find within restrictive covenants ex facie too wide, implicit limitations such as alone could justify their imposition.
To construe covenants otherwise would encourage employers to draft their covenants deliberately in wide terms.65 However, in Littlewoods Organisation Ltd. v Harris66 Lord Denning MR adopted a much more relaxed approach to construction and a covenant that an employee
... shall not at any time within twelve months ... enter into a contract of service or other agreement of a like nature with GUS or any subsidiary thereto.
was interpreted as being limited to the mail order side of those parts of the GUS organization that operated in the United Kingdom. The distinction is that in this case, there had been an attempt to draw up a reasonable covenant.
Subject matter of covenants
There is some judicial confusion about the proper subject-matter of a covenant in restraint of trade in terms of confidential information. In Faccenda Chicken, Neill LJ suggested that only trade secrets or their equivalent could be protected by a restrictive covenant and that more mundane information could not. However, this was obiter (there was not a restrictive covenant imposed on the defendant) and it conflicts with Neill Q's own description of the implied term imposed after termination of employment. The implied term protects trade secrets and, consequently, there is no need for a restrictive covenant in respect of them. In Balston Ltd. v Headline Filters Ltd.67 Scott J declined to follow that part of Neill LJ's judgment to the effect that confidential information that could not be protected by an implied term ipso facto could not be protected by a suitably limited express covenant 68 This accords with common sense as most business organizations possess information that would harm them or benefit others if divulged even though that information is not a trade secret or associated with one. By limiting the restriction the courts are seeking to arrive at an equitable balance between the interests of employer and employee alike.
Garden leave
Employers are often worried about the harm that can be caused to them by an employee working his notice. The employee might attempt to influence clients or remove confidential materials. It is not unknown for employees who have given or have been given notice of termination of their employment to be told to stay at home and `enjoy the garden' during their period of notice. This `garden leave' may last for some time if the employee is in a senior position subject to lengthy period of notice. If the employee attempts to work for another employer during his garden leave, the courts may act to restrain him.
Factors that may be relevant include the amount and nature of confidential information the employee had access to and the seniority of the employee. However, in Provident Financial Group v Hayward69 the Court of Appeal refused to grant an injunction against an employee on garden leave because little of the period of notice remained, there was no evidence of a serious prospect that the employer's interests would be harmed and the employee worked in an administrative capacity, having access to very little confidential
information. It could also be argued that enforced garden leave is a breach of the contract of employment as an implied term is that the employer provides suitable work, if available.
Third party recipients
The general rule is that a third party who comes by the information without knowing it to be confidential or in circumstances where an obligation of confidence cannot be imposed is free to use the information or to disclose it as he sees fit especially if it entered the public domain. This is the one fundamental weakness of the law of breach of confidence - innocent third parties are largely unaffected by this area of law. They may, however, be subject to other rights duties or liabilities. For example, the information may be in the form of a literary work and a question of infringement of copyright might be raised., Alternatively, use of the information may result in an action for passing off or its publication may be defamatory.
The position of the person who is not aware of the confidential nature of the information at the time it is disclosed to him but subsequently becomes so aware is less clear. In Fraser v Evans7O Lord Denning MR said (at 361):
No person is permitted to divulge to the world information he has received in confidence, unless he has just cause or excuse for doing so. Even if he comes by it innocently, nevertheless once he gets to know that it was originally given in confidence, he can be restrained from breaking that confidence.
It can be said that an equity fastens on the person's conscience once he discovers the confidential nature of the information. However, equitable remedies are discretionary and injunctive relief may not be given where it could cause hardship on their parties. The person to whom the information has been given might have performed work or made contracts with other persons in reliance of that information. This factor did not, however, prevent an Australian judge imposing injunctions on all the defendants (most of whom had unwittingly paid for the information).7l
There will be circumstances where a third party will be bound by an obligation of confidence even though the owner of the information did not impart the information to the third party directly. The third party may receive confidential information knowing it to be confidential or in circumstances where a reasonable man would have suspected that it was confidential. In other cases, he may discover the confidential nature of the information subsequently. It appears that only when the recipient actually knows of the confidential nature will he be under an obligation not to use or divulge the information further. In Fraser v Thames TV Ltd.,72 three actresses formed a rock group with the assistance of a manager and developed an idea for a TV series known as The Rock Follies. They discussed the idea orally with Thames TV in confidence and it was agreed that the actresses were to have first refusal should the series proceed. When Thames TV decided to proceed, one of the actresses could not get a release from another part and Thames TV replaced her with another actress.
It was held that the court would prevent a person disclosing an idea in written or oral form until it became general public knowledge, provided that:
(a) the circumstances imputed an obligation of confidence, and
(b) the content was clearly identifiable, potentially attractive in a commercial sense and capable of being brought to fruition.
For a third party to be fixed with an obligation of confidence, he must know that the information was confidential and had been imparted in confidence. Even though it was disclosed to several people, it was disclosed to each and all of them in confidence. An argument by counsel for the defence that the idea lost its confidentiality when it was disclosed to others was rejected by Hirst J who said that the disclosure to others was plainly also in confidence and, therefore, confidence remained intact.73 The actress who had been replaced was awarded very substantial damages.
A discussion of third party recipients is not complete without consideration of the position of a person who obtains the information surreptitiously, for example in circumstances involving industrial espionage. Can such a person be fixed with an obligation of confidence? At first sight it appears not, especially when the formula used in the Coco case is examined as it seems to suggest that the information is given voluntarily by its owner. There is very little case law on this point but in Malone v Commissioner o f Police Megarry VC was of the view that an eavesdropper would not owe a duty of confidence. Malone involved telephone-tapping, an activity which is now illegal under section 1 of the Interception of Communications Act 1985 which makes it an offence to intentionally intercept a communication during its transmission through a public telecommunications system.
In Malone, the telephone tap was lawful but Megarry VC spoke of unknown hearers and said that a person using a telephone to disclose confidential information must accept the risk of being overheard as that risk is inherent in the mode of communication. This case was distinguished in Francome v Mirror Group Newspapers Ltd.7s where it was held that there was a serious issue to be tried on the basis of breach of confidence concerning information obtained by way of an illegal telephone tap. Although a person using a telephone takes the risk of being overheard because of imperfections or accidents, he does not willingly take the risk of an illegal tap. The same principle should apply to facsimile transmission. The sender takes the risk of the information being seen by persons, other than those to whom it is intended, who have access to the room where the receiving machine is installed. Even the risk of misdirection must be accepted. It must be questionable whether confidentiality can remain intact if a number of persons, other than those directly associated with the addressee such as secretarial staff, have an opportunity to read the contents of a facsimile transmission. Likewise, the status of a notice on the transmitted material to the effect that it is confidential and must not be read by anyone other than the addressee is doubtful. It should be noted that in the case of Prince Albert v Strange, the court found for the plaintiff even though it was not known how the defendant had gained possession of the subject-matter, only that it must have been done surreptitiously. If the information in question contains personal data and is subsequently stored in a computer by the eavesdropper or spy, there may be an offence under the Data Protection Act 1984.
UNAUTHORIZED USE
The final ingredient for an action for breach of confidence is an unauthorized use of the information to the detriment of the party communicating it. It will usually be fairly obvious when there has been an unauthorized use of confidential material. The use or disclosure complained of must be related to the nature of the obligation of confidence. For example, in an agreement between the owner of confidential information and a manufacturing company who are going to exploit it commercially on the basis of agreed royalty payments, the company will be permitted to use the information for the purposes detailed in the agreement. In addition, other use and subsequent disclosure may be implied. For example, the company may be able to divulge the information to subcontractors whilst stressing its confidentiality and to the company's own employees and to sister companies if part of a group. It is really a matter of construing the agreement.
If the information is a mixture of public and private materials then the recipient must be especially careful only to use that which is public, unless he has permission to use the private information. In Seager v Copydex (No. 1) the defendant designed a carpet grip using details from the public domain but also incorporating some ideas it had discussed with the plaintiff some years before. The defendant claimed it had forgotten about the latter so it was effectively a case of subconscious copying. Nevertheless and notwithstanding the `innocence' of the defendant's actions, Lord Denning MR found for the plaintiff. It would appear, therefore, that the state of the mind of the person using the information in breach of confidence does not affect liability although it could be relevant when it comes to determining damages.
That there should be some detriment to the party communicating the information is doubtful. In many cases, the justification for protecting confidences is that they are tied up with commercial activity, investment and marketing and industrial manufacture. In other words, confidence has an economic value to its owner who will have a vested interest to see that his competitors do not have access to the information, at least not without paying for it. But the law of breach of confidence has a tremendously wide scope and in some cases, economic considerations are largely irrelevant, for example where the disclosure of the information is likely to harm a person's public standing.
Where the information has economic value, it is easily understandable why the owner of the information would not want to see his competitors have some advantage from it. In R v Licensing Authority ex parte Smith, Kline e'r French Laboratories Ltd., SKF originated a drug, known as Cimetidine to control gastric acid secretion and heal peptic ulcers. SKF marketed the drug under the name `Tagamet' and obtained patents in respect of it in 1972 which were extended to 1992 on the basis that during the last four years the patents would be endorsed `licences of right'. SKF and others wishing to sell the drug had to obtain a product licence from the licensing authority. SKF objected to the licensing authority using confidential information submitted by SKF in support of its own application in order to consider other companies' applications for product licences. The High Court held that this was a breach of confidence but this was reversed in the Court of Appeal. The House of Lords upheld the Court
of Appeal saying that the licensing authority, at its discretion and in the performance of its duties under the Medicines Act 1968 and Community law, had a right to make use of all the information provided by applicants for product licences in determining whether to grant other applications. Two important factors were the protection of public health and the harmonization of the national laws through Member States.
Of course, this case has tremendous significance for originators of medicines and generic manufacturers. The originator has all the expense of research, development and, in particular, testing new drugs and medicines. If the drug or medicine was covered by patents then, theoretically, all the competitor has to do is to look up the patent specifications (being documents available for public inspection) and then, at the appropriate time, apply for a compulsory licence in respect of the patents or to have the patents endorsed `licences of right'. However, the patent owner's monopoly will not be easily disturbed unless there is some evidence that the patent is not being worked or is being unfairly exploited in some way. This reluctance to interfere with the monopoly provided by patents is justifiable in the context of something like a drug where a potential competitor could seriously undercut the originator because the former has not spent large sums of money on research and development.
REMEDIES
The whole rationale and justification for the law of breach of confidence is that it can and should be used to preserve secrets and confidences. Because of this the most appropriate remedy is the quia timet injunction which will be granted to prevent general publication or other disclosure of the subject-matter of the confidence. However, as previously noted, an injunction will not normally be granted if the aggrieved party complains that publication would be defamatory and the defendant is likely to raise a defence of justification or fair comment. In such a case, the courts will usually allow the defendant to publish and take the risk of paying damages, which could be considerable, should his defence in a defamation action fail. In some cases, an injunction may be granted to prevent the defendant making use of the information himself even though innocent third parties may be free to use it, the so-called `springboard doctrine' discussed earlier in this chapter. However, normally, once the information has fallen into the public domain, an injunction will not be granted because it is ineffective, for example as in one of the Spycatcher cases, Attorney-General v The Observer Ltd. In the House of Lords it was held that injunctions would not be granted against The Observer and The Guardian preventing them from reporting on the contents of Spycatcher because publication abroad had effectively destroyed the secrecy of its contents.
Being equitable, injunctions are discretionary, and the decision to grant an injunction will be influenced by factors such as the `innocence' of the defendant, for example in the case of non-deliberate use of information as in Seager v Copydex (No. 1), and whether an injunction is really necessary. In Coco v A N Clark (Engineers) Ltd, the court decided that payment of damages in the form of royalties would be a sufficient remedy. Other considerations might be whether the plaintiff delayed in taking legal action, whether he was careless
with the information or whether he should have sought other legal means of protecting the information, for example by obtaining a patent.
If the information has been disclosed or used in some way in breach of confidence, then it will usually be too late for an injunction but damages may be available. Damages may be calculated on the basis of conversion, breach of confidence being in the nature of an equitable tort. The most thorough and comprehensive discussion of the relevant principles is to be found in Seager v Copydex Ltd. (No. 2),89 where it was said that the value of confidential information depends upon its nature, and one of the following two formulae would be appropriate:
(a) If there is nothing very special about the information, and it could have been obtained by employing a competent consultant, then the value (for the purpose of damages) is the fee that consultant would charge.
(b) If the information is something special involving an inventive step, then the value is the price a willing buyer would pay for it.
If the information is commercial in nature and used in the manufacture of an object which is sold or hired, then it would seem that damages should be assessed on the basis of the fee the owner of the information reasonably might have expected had the information been used with his licence. Assessing damages for future infringement would be difficult using the second formula in Seager above. One might also question why a patent had not been applied for if there is an inventive step. A better approach would be that used in the Coco case where an order was granted to the effect that the defendant should pay into a trust account a royalty on engines made in the future.
If the information has been exploited commercially in breach of confidence, an account of profits may be more beneficial to the plaintiff. An account is an alternative to damages and, being an equitable remedy, is discretionary. In Peter Pan Manufacturing Corp. v Corsets Silhouette Ltd. a manufacturer of brassieres made use of confidential information under a licence agreement. After the expiry of a licence agreement, the manufacturer continued to use the information, clearly in breach of confidence. In an action for breach of confidence, the plaintiff asked for an account of profits based on the whole of the profits accruing from the brassieres but the defendant claimed that the account of profits should be based only on the profit resulting from the wrongful use of the confidential information, that is the profit relating to the parts of the brassieres incorporating the confidential information. The difference between the two sums was substantial and the plaintiff was awarded the higher sum because it was accepted by the court that the defendants would not have been able to make the brassieres at all without the use of the confidential information.
Finally, another equitable remedy which might be available, depending upon the circumstances, is an order for the destruction of articles that have been made by using the confidential information or which incorporate the tangible expression of such information. For example, an order for destruction of any of the brassieres still held in stock by the defendant in the above case might have been appropriate. Such an order would not be granted as regards articles lawfully in the possession of third parties, unless somehow implicated in the breach of confidence.
